Title: Climate Point: Climate change has yet to be canceled due to coronavirus

Content Text:
Welcome to Climate Point, your weekly guide to climate, energy and environment news from across the Golden State and the country. From Palm Springs, Calif., I’m Mark Olalde.
We're in the midst of a pandemic, one that has exposed a continued hesitation to trust science and fault lines of fear that increase racist finger-pointing over the origins of the novel coronavirus. The problems are evident at the highest levels, where officials in the Trump administration have reportedly called the coronavirus the "Kung-Flu" and the "Chinese virus."
What this rhetoric completely misses, however, are the causes of deadly diseases spurred by exotic viruses. "Demand for wood, minerals and resources" clears habitat and disrupts ecological processes, presenting opportunities for pathogens ranging from ebola to coronavirus to pass from wildlife to humans, The Guardian reported this week. 
Here's some other important reporting...
Going to nature to ... reconnect? Do you love our national parks system and heading into nature to get away from it all? Do you wish those breathtaking vistas had better cell service, gosh darnit, so you could Instagram a selfie immediately? Jimmy Tobias reports for High Country News on the National Park Service's push to work with AT&T and other telecom giants to pockmark protected lands with cell towers.
When we're not looking. The coronavirus is sucking the air out of most other stories, making this the perfect time to slip through unpopular plans. Juliet Eilperin and Darryl Fears of The Washington Post found that oil and gas leases are being proposed on more than 150,000 acres in southern Utah, including within half-a-mile of Canyonlands National Park. The Bureau of Land Management can reject requests to open these areas to drilling, but it has been hesitant to do so under the Trump Administration.
A radioactive proposal. Speaking of heavy industry near national parks, The Arizona Republic reports that the quickly dying American uranium industry continues to hold out hope that the Trump Administration will throw it a lifeline. He formed something called the Nuclear Fuel Working Group to help determine if uranium should be listed as a critical mineral due to its use in nuclear power plants. If the idea is approved, many people are concerned that mining might move forward near the Grand Canyon.
Resurrecting coal. American coal production has plummeted since a peak in 2008 as cheap natural gas and the slow shift to cleaner energy ravaged its market share. But an export terminal proposed for Washington has for years been seen as a potential saving grace that would further open Asian markets. The idea is now all but dead in the water, as the court system recently upheld yet another decision to deny it permits. The Daily News in Washington brings us the latest in what's an integral part of the coal industry's fight for its life.
Cow v. river. The Center for Biological Diversity plans to sue the U.S. Forest Service over what it claims are destructive cattle grazing practices along the Verde River in Arizona. The Arizona Republic reports that environmentalists say grazing is damaging important riparian habitats, while the government, which did not respond to specific questions, argues it is indeed working to protect the river.
Shading solar. A new report on the state of the solar industry comes with some dark clouds, Reuters reports. As the coronavirus disrupts international supply chains, a downturn is expected for the growing industry, although just how dramatic remains unknown.
The warming continues. Just because our attention is on the coronavirus, that doesn't mean the elephant in the room — climate change — is going anywhere. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration found that this winter was the second-hottest on record, USA Today reports. Those logs extend all the way back to 1880. The most extreme cases of winter warming come from Russia, where temperatures were 12 degrees above average in some places.
Goodbye, U.S. frackers? What the coronavirus has done, however, is to combine with an international oil price war and flawed domestic business practices to tank the U.S. fracking industry. Grist is out with a helpful explainer on how these factors are merging to expose small fossil fuel companies that are on shaky financial footing and likely to go under as prices remain in flux. The Wall Street Journal found that Texas has begun considering capping production in response.
Climate activism marches on. "Climate activists are retooling their strategy for an online existence during the coronavirus pandemic," Zack Colman with Politico reports. Instead of mass gatherings, groups led by youth activists are turning to social media and other digital tools to continue their fight.
Go outside and play. You need to be practicing social distancing and staying away from the general public in order to slow the spread of the coronavirus and protect those most vulnerable to COVID-19. Thankfully, that doesn't mean that you should completely avoid fresh air! Some public lands are getting too crowded and should be avoided. For example, trips to the Channel Islands National Park have been cancelled, the Ventura County Star reports. But, you can and should get outside if you can do so away from other people. Enjoy what public lands have to offer, the Casper Star-Tribune explains.
Scientists agree that to maintain a livable planet, we need to reduce the atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration back to 350 ppm. We’re above that and rising dangerously. Here are the latest numbers:
That’s all for now. Don’t forget to follow along on Twitter at @MarkOlalde. You can also reach me at molalde@gannett.com. You can sign up to get Climate Point in your inbox for free here. And, if you’d like to receive a daily round-up of California news (also for free!), you can sign up for USA Today’s new In California newsletter here. Cheers.