Title: Justin Timberlake, a Tennessee native, says Confederate statues 'must be taken down'

Spotlight: He said removing them is a 'symbol of respect' for Black American citizens

Content Text:
Fox News Flash top entertainment and celebrity headlines are here. Check out what's clicking today in entertainment.
"A lot of you know I’m from Tennessee...a state that happens to be the home of many many confederate monuments. I’ve been listening closely to the ongoing debates about what to do with these statues — and I really want to take a minute to talk about this. When we protest racism in America, people think we are protesting America itself. Why is that the reaction? Because America was built by men who believed in and benefitted from racism. Plain and simple," Timberlake's caption began.
"This is when you hear 'But that’s all in the past'. So let’s be clear... those men who proudly owned and abused Black people are STILL celebrated all over the country," the "Suit & Tie" singer continued.
Timberlake's lengthy caption was written underneath a video he shared on the social media platform featuring the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) deputy legal director Jeffrey Robinson.
In the video, Robinson said the top 10 states with confederate monuments "account for over 4,000 lynchings in 73 years from 1977 to 1950."
Timberlake said there are "roughly 1,848 confederate statues" still standing in the United States.
"More than half are in The South, and it's not acceptable. No one should be protecting the legacies of confederate leaders and slave owners," Timberlake wrote. "If we plan to move forward, these monuments must come down."
US singer-songwriter Justin Timberlake attends the 2019 Songwriters Hall Of Fame Gala at The New York Marriott Marquis on June 13, 2019 in New York City. (Getty)
He concluded: "But let's remember: Removing these statues does not erase our country's vile history of oppression — removing them is a symbol of respect for Black people in America and it's a step towards progress and actual equality for all."
Fox News' Tyler Olson contributed to this report