Lots of People Don’t Like Being Injected with Mystery Substances, Study Finds
    
If people feel uncomfortable with the idea of being injected with strange artificial liquids and express their concern about it, the correct way to proceed isn’t to use studies and scientific literature to mount a defense of the whole practice.
No. Don’t even try to explain to them why the ingredients are safe.
Just shun, shame, and mock them for their crime of not having blind trust in science.
Study Finds:
The anti-vaccination movement, despite its controversial philosophy, continues to gain quite a followers. Similar to popular conspiracy theories, the mindset that vaccinations do more harm than good has largely spread thanks to the internet and social media. Recently, researchers from the Annenberg Public Policy Center conducted a study on modern vaccine beliefs involving close to 2,500 U.S adults. The ensuing results show just how widespread vaccine misinformation is on social media, and even worse, how many people are believing what these posts preach.
In light of these findings, the study’s author implore readers to only trust vaccine information from trusted medical sources, or more traditional forms of media at the very least.
Yes. Just trust us.
We have your best interests at heart.
Up to 20% of all respondents were at least somewhat misinformed when it came to the topic of vaccines. That is an incredibly high rate of misinformation. Researchers say this is especially concerning because it could eventually lead to significantly lower rates of vaccination among the U.S. public, which would in turn put essentially everyone at a higher risk of catching a multitude of detrimental and potentially deadly diseases, viruses, or illnesses.
Here’s just a sample of some of the false narratives that some study participants admitted to believing: 18% said that is very or somewhat accurate to say that vaccines cause autism. Another 15% wrongly said that vaccines are “full of toxins.”
“We won’t explain why vaccination magic requires everyone to be vaccinated in order to work for those who are vaccinated.”
“Just trust us, we’re SCIENTISTS.”
“People who received their information from traditional media were less likely to endorse common anti-vaccination claims,” says lead author Dominik Stecula, a postdoctoral fellow in the science of science communication program at the Annenberg Public Policy Center, in a release.
 Meanwhile, another 20% of participants wrongly said that it largely makes no difference whether or not parents choose to vaccine their children according to the timelines suggested by doctors according to the official vaccine schedule for the CDC. Another 19% even went so far as to say that it is healthier to develop an immunity for a disease by contracting it as opposed to being vaccinated. That is not accurate, researchers warn.
All in all, it’s very clear that doctors and pro-vaccination campaigns need to do a better job in promoting accurate information when it comes to vaccines. Furthermore, if the real issue here is an inherent distrust of the medical industry, health professionals the world over need to consider how to gain some trust back.
“Warning” and “promoting” aren’t really good strategies if the goal is to gain people’s trust.
Why not just put out convincing explanations, with source material to read, addressing people’s concerns?
Why does the strategy have to be a condescending “lmao trust me, I’m a doctor“?
If vaccination as a mechanism works, that doesn’t mean that vaccines cannot be a health hazard depending on how they’re made.
Kinda like the fact that just because eating is necessary to avoid starvation, doesn’t mean that all food is healthy.