Title: Farrakhan dismisses coronavirus vaccine as 'toxic waste'

Spotlight: Nation of Islam leader claims vaccine part of a plot by the devil

Content Text:
Fox News medical contributor Dr. Marc Siegel says a coronavirus vaccine needs to reach ‘as many people as possible.’
“Now we have to survive because the death plan is in motion," Farrakhan said. He claimed that Black people suffer from coronavirus more than others because of underlying conditions like heart failure, diabetes and obesity – conditions that he said are prevalent in the Black community because “they send the worst food” to ZIP codes with large Black populations.
Farrakhan went on to suggest that what people really need to combat COVID-19 is vitamin D from sunlight, not a vaccine.
“Do you know why the virus is not getting the Caribbean like it’s hitting America and Europe?" he asked. "Because we live in the sun.”
Minister Louis Farrakhan, of the Nation of Islam, speaks at Saint Sabina Church, Thursday night, May 9, 2019, in Chicago. (Ashlee Rezin/Chicago Sun-Times via AP)
Farrakhan went on to claim that the vaccine was part of a plot by the devil.
"Now they're getting us ready for the vaccine. Brothers and sisters, do you believe in Satan?" he asked before adding, "How could you allow him to stick a needle into you saying he's helping you?"
The Nation of Islam leader then alluded to a proposal from former Democratic presidential candidate John Delaney to offer $1,500 stimulus checks for people who get vaccinated. He appeared to liken plans for mass distribution of the vaccine to contaminated water in Flint.
“They gave free shots of toxic waste. Free," he said before claiming that "the same lead that’s in the water in Flint is in the water in Detroit is in the water in Cleveland, you watch it’s in the water in Chicago."
Farrakhan then used a slur against White people while dismissing the notion of employers and schools not allowing people to return without receiving the vaccination first.
“What a blessing. Tell the cracker, ‘I ain’t coming to your school,'" he said. "When you tell me I can’t go to your school I open up a school of my own."
Ronn Blitzer is an editor for Fox News Digital covering politics and breaking news. 