Title: Drugmakers Make Safety Pledge In Race To Develop COVID-19 Vaccine

Spotlight: Nine companies vow to follow “high ethical standards and sound scientific principles," despite pressure from President Trump to have a vaccine this fall.

Content Text:
LOADINGERROR LOADING
Nine drugmakers racing to develop a COVID-19 vaccine in the U.S. and Europe have signed a pledge to put safety first and adhere to scientific guidelines amid growing public skepticism and pressure from the White House to release a vaccine by the end of the year.
In a letter released Tuesday, the companies publicly vowed to follow “high ethical standards and sound scientific principles” set by regulatory agencies, including the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Any product submitted for emergency use authorization will have to first demonstrate safety and efficacy through large clinical trials.
Advertisement


“We believe this pledge will help ensure public confidence in the rigorous scientific and regulatory process by which COVID-19 vaccines are evaluated and may ultimately be approved,” the letter states.
The companies in the agreement are AstraZeneca Plc, BioNTech SE, GlaxoSmithKline Plc, Johnson & Johnson, Merck & Co., Moderna Inc., Novavax Inc., Pfizer Inc. and Sanofi.
President Donald Trump has been pressuring health officials to speed up the development of a vaccine. He suggested last month that members of “the deep state” within the FDA are trying to delay vaccine efforts in order to hurt his reelection bid this November.
Advertisement


The deep state, or whoever, over at the FDA is making it very difficult for drug companies to get people in order to test the vaccines and therapeutics. Obviously, they are hoping to delay the answer until after November 3rd. Must focus on speed, and saving lives! @SteveFDA— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 22, 2020
As Trump builds pressure on drug companies to release a vaccine, public concern that health officials and drugmakers may be cutting corners when it comes to vaccine development has grown, according to a recent CBS News poll.
Two-thirds of voters polled earlier this month said they would perceive a vaccine produced this year as “rushed” instead of as a “scientific achievement.” Just 21% of those polled also said they would get vaccinated as soon as a vaccine became available, at no cost. This is down from 32% in late July.
The FDA has faced its own public trust issues. Late last month, FDA Commissioner Stephen Hahn made erroneous claims that overstated the benefits of plasma treatments for COVID-19 patients, leading to the ouster of the agency’s top spokesperson.
Hahn has also been criticized for authorizing the emergency use of two malaria drugs for COVID-19 patients, which were later found to have no actual benefit. The emergency use authorization followed a public push by Trump.
Advertisement


Sen. Kamala Harris (D-Calif.), the Democratic nominee for vice president, said in an interview released Saturday that she would not trust Trump’s word on vaccine safety and warned that he may be inappropriately interfering in the vaccine development’s process.
“He’s looking at an election coming up in less than 60 days and he’s grasping to get whatever he can to pretend he has been a leader on this issue when he is not,” she told CNN.

A HuffPost Guide To CoronavirusWhat should you still be disinfecting to prevent COVID-19?Is it possible you had coronavirus earlier this year?How can you manage your anxiety as coronavirus restrictions lift? Here’s the latest on how long COVID-19 antibodies last.How will COVID-19 change your office?Laid off and lost your health insurance? You have options.Everything you need to know about face masks right now. Find all our coronavirus coverage here.Everyone deserves accurate information about COVID-19. Support journalism without a paywall — and keep it free for everyone — by becoming a HuffPost member today.
Support HuffPostOur 2024 Coverage Needs YouYour Loyalty Means The World To UsAt HuffPost, we believe that everyone needs high-quality journalism, but we understand that not everyone can afford to pay for expensive news subscriptions. That is why we are committed to providing deeply reported, carefully fact-checked news that is freely accessible to everyone.Whether you come to HuffPost for updates on the 2024 presidential race, hard-hitting investigations into critical issues facing our country today, or trending stories that make you laugh, we appreciate you. The truth is, news costs money to produce, and we are proud that we have never put our stories behind an expensive paywall.Would you join us to help keep our stories free for all? Your contribution of as little as $2 will go a long way.As Americans head to the polls in 2024, the very future of our country is at stake. At HuffPost, we believe that a free press is critical to creating well-informed voters. That's why our journalism is free for everyone, even though other newsrooms retreat behind expensive paywalls.Our journalists will continue to cover the twists and turns during this historic presidential election. With your help, we'll bring you hard-hitting investigations, well-researched analysis and timely takes you can't find elsewhere. Reporting in this current political climate is a responsibility we do not take lightly, and we thank you for your support.Contribute as little as $2 to keep our news free for all.Dear HuffPost ReaderThank you for your past contribution to HuffPost. We are sincerely grateful for readers like you who help us ensure that we can keep our journalism free for everyone.The stakes are high this year, and our 2024 coverage could use continued support. Would you consider becoming a regular HuffPost contributor?Dear HuffPost ReaderThank you for your past contribution to HuffPost. We are sincerely grateful for readers like you who help us ensure that we can keep our journalism free for everyone.The stakes are high this year, and our 2024 coverage could use continued support. If circumstances have changed since you last contributed, we hope you’ll consider contributing to HuffPost once more.Support HuffPostAlready contributed? Log in to hide these messages.