Title: U.S. Airline Industry Says It Won't Bounce Back From COVID-19 Until 2024

Spotlight: The CEO for the major lobbying group representing U.S. airlines said the situation was “dire” and called for more government aid.

Content Text:
LOADINGERROR LOADING
Airlines for America, the lobbying group representing major U.S. carriers, has warned that the U.S. airline industry is unlikely to bounce back from the COVID-19 drop for at least four years. 
“We don’t see any significant increase in demand,” Nicholas Calio, the CEO of Airlines for America, told reporters during a media call on Thursday. “We don’t see it fully rebounding until 2024. We are doing everything we can to keep our companies afloat. People talk about the situation being dire. It is dire. Right now, we’re fighting for survival. No bones about it.”
Advertisement


Calio said that the government would need to step in to offer another lifeline, preferably in the form of a new CARES act, which was passed in March and provided $25 billion in grants and loans to the airline industry, with the intention of keeping pilots, attendants and other necessary personnel employed until Oct. 1. Negotiations on extending this stimulus package have stalled between congressional Republicans and Democrats.
With October on the horizon and the coronavirus pandemic still ongoing, multiple airlines have announced the need to cut staff unless more federal help arrives. This includes United, which plans to furlough 16,370 employees, and American Airlines, which plans to furlough 19,000.
President Donald Trump said on Tuesday that his administration would be assisting airlines — which he called “a tough business in good times” — but did not give further details.
“People will be reluctant to travel — or even to book travel — until there is a strong degree of confidence that the health crisis and associated risks are behind us,” the latest Airlines for America report on the state of the airline industry reads. “The COVID-19 global pandemic constitutes a black-swan public health crisis that will only be solved once an effective vaccine is developed, but vaccines usually take a year or longer to develop.”
Advertisement


These statements are in line with predictions from the International Air Transport Association, which also announced at the end of July that the global airline business was unlikely to return in full force until 2024, citing continual COVID-19 flareups in the United States as a contributing factor. 

A HuffPost Guide To CoronavirusWhat should you still be disinfecting to prevent COVID-19?Is it possible you had coronavirus earlier this year?How can you manage your anxiety as coronavirus restrictions lift? Here’s the latest on how long COVID-19 antibodies last.How will COVID-19 change your office?Laid off and lost your health insurance? You have options.Everything you need to know about face masks right now. Find all our coronavirus coverage here.Everyone deserves accurate information about COVID-19. Support journalism without a paywall — and keep it free for everyone — by becoming a HuffPost member today.
Support HuffPostOur 2024 Coverage Needs YouYour Loyalty Means The World To UsAt HuffPost, we believe that everyone needs high-quality journalism, but we understand that not everyone can afford to pay for expensive news subscriptions. That is why we are committed to providing deeply reported, carefully fact-checked news that is freely accessible to everyone.Whether you come to HuffPost for updates on the 2024 presidential race, hard-hitting investigations into critical issues facing our country today, or trending stories that make you laugh, we appreciate you. The truth is, news costs money to produce, and we are proud that we have never put our stories behind an expensive paywall.Would you join us to help keep our stories free for all? Your contribution of as little as $2 will go a long way.As Americans head to the polls in 2024, the very future of our country is at stake. At HuffPost, we believe that a free press is critical to creating well-informed voters. That's why our journalism is free for everyone, even though other newsrooms retreat behind expensive paywalls.Our journalists will continue to cover the twists and turns during this historic presidential election. With your help, we'll bring you hard-hitting investigations, well-researched analysis and timely takes you can't find elsewhere. Reporting in this current political climate is a responsibility we do not take lightly, and we thank you for your support.Contribute as little as $2 to keep our news free for all.Dear HuffPost ReaderThank you for your past contribution to HuffPost. We are sincerely grateful for readers like you who help us ensure that we can keep our journalism free for everyone.The stakes are high this year, and our 2024 coverage could use continued support. Would you consider becoming a regular HuffPost contributor?Dear HuffPost ReaderThank you for your past contribution to HuffPost. We are sincerely grateful for readers like you who help us ensure that we can keep our journalism free for everyone.The stakes are high this year, and our 2024 coverage could use continued support. If circumstances have changed since you last contributed, we hope you’ll consider contributing to HuffPost once more.Support HuffPostAlready contributed? Log in to hide these messages.