Title: Nancy Pelosi invites two transgender Army officers as guests to State of the Union

Content Text:
WASHINGTON – House Speaker Nancy Pelosi announced Tuesday that she was bringing two transgender military service members to the State of the Union. 
The guests, Army Capt. Jennifer Peace and Army Maj. Ian Brown, are among the list of 22 people and prominent figures Pelosi invited to watch President Donald Trump's speech in the House chambers. 
Peace was one of many transgender service members who spoke out against Trump after he announced on Twitter in July 2017 that the military would no longer allow transgender individuals "to serve in any capacity." 
"We have trans people who are currently serving in every combat zone that America is in," Peace argued on PBS. "I have deployed to Iraq, Afghanistan, Japan, Malaysia, Korea, I've been all around the world while transitioning and it hasn't had any impact." 
She added that the reasons outlined by the administration, including medical costs, unit readiness and the cohesiveness of units, were moot points. Peace argued that the military spends more money on Viagra than helping troops transition and that pregnancy takes a woman out of combat-readiness for much longer than the act of transitioning. 
Peace said she has come out to many within the military and even led a unit, which she said respected her and didn't look at her differently because of her sex. 
"I think the problem is that most only know about trans persons from what they've seen in the media and from stereotypes," Peace said. "That's why I think it's so important to do things like this."
Peace and Brown's attendance at the event will highlight the Trump administration's policy banning transgender individuals from serving in the military. 
The issue has been bubbling for more than a year after the Trump administration attempted to roll out a policy banning many transgender individuals from serving in the military. 
More: Supreme Court allows Trump's partial ban on transgender troops in military to take effect
More: Supreme Court's actions on transgender troops, gun rights, public prayer signal conservative trend
Lawsuits immediately targeted the new policy and challenges were taken all the way to the Supreme Court.
The high court ruled last month that Trump's partial ban on transgender people serving in the military could take effect while other court challenges continue.
Responding to Justice Department requests, the high court cleared away lower-court actions that blocked the controversial policy from being implemented for nearly a year. 
The court's four liberal justices – Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan – said they would have continued to block the policy. They were overruled by the five conservative justices.
However, the court refused to hear the case this term, before the Trump administration fights its way through federal appeals courts. That will leave the legal questions surrounding the Pentagon's policy unresolved for now.
The order represents a victory for the administration, which has railed against nationwide injunctions issued by local judges. Similar injunctions have thwarted efforts to deport undocumented immigrants who arrived as children, as well as asylum-seekers who cross the border illegally.
Contributing: Richard Wolf