Title: Fact check: New York's abortion law doesn't allow any abortion 'up until birth,' as claimed

Content Text:
New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo has been center stage throughout the coronavirus pandemic, as his state is the epicenter of the U.S. outbreak with more than 263,000 confirmed cases and 16,000 deaths.
As Cuomo became a more recognizable face amid the pandemic, a viral Facebook post from March 25 claimed, "Human life is not disposable, said NY Governor Andrew Cuomo, the man who recently signed a bill legalizing abortion up until birth."
More: Gov. Andrew Cuomo showed a mural of donated masks to New York. Then social media weighed in
New York state's abortion law has previously been the subject of misinformation. 
It became a talking point when Cuomo signed abortion legislation codifying Roe vs. Wade into state law in January 2019. 
New York's Reproductive Health Act allows practitioners to perform an abortion on a patient who is 24 weeks or more away from the start of a pregnancy if the fetus is not viable or the abortion is necessary "to protect the patient's life or health."
The law does not define "health" or viability of a fetus. The determination of these factors must be made by a "health care practitioner licensed, certified, or authorized" under state law, "acting within his or her lawful scope of practice." 
Before Cuomo signed the legislation, abortions after 24 weeks were allowed only when the mother's life was at risk. They otherwise were criminalized.
The Reproductive Health Act also removed abortion from the state's penal code, and the statute still defines a person as a "human being who has been born and is alive." Killing a baby once born is still considered homicide. 
Typically, pregnancies range from 38 to 42 weeks and babies are considered viable at 37 weeks. Across the country: 
Alabama has the most restrictive abortion law in the U.S., banning abortion at any stage of pregnancy and for any reason, including in cases of rape and incest. The law is on hold after a federal judge ruled the ban "defies the United States Constitution." 
Virginia has a more lenient law than Alabama in terms of time frame and bans abortion at the third trimester, which begins at 25 weeks. 
A 2018 report from the CDC found that in 2015, there were 638,169 reported abortions in the U.S. Of those, 65% of the procedures were performed at or before the eight-week mark and 91% were performed at or before the 13-week mark. Only 1.3% of abortions recorded were performed at 21 weeks or later. 
We rate the claim in the Facebook post as PARTLY FALSE, based on our research. While it is true that New York's abortion law allows procedures after 24 weeks, there are rules guiding that procedure: if the fetus is not viable or if the health or life of the mother is at risk. If medical practitioners determine that either of these factors are present, the mother can choose to have an abortion. 
It is false to state or imply that any abortion can occur in New York "up until birth" as the social posts claims. That is misleading. Additionally, no state in the U.S. allows abortion "up until birth."