Title: Colin Powell Says He 'Cannot In Any Way' Support Trump, Will Vote For Joe Biden

Spotlight: Trump "lies about things and he gets away with it because people will not hold him accountable," the former secretary of state told CNN.

Content Text:
LOADINGERROR LOADING
Former Secretary of State Colin Powell said Sunday that he will vote for Joe Biden in the upcoming presidential election, stating he “cannot in any way” support President Donald Trump’s reelection bid.
“We have a Constitution and we have to follow that Constitution and the president has drifted away from it,” Powell, a Republican, said during an appearance on CNN’s “State Of The Union.”
Advertisement


“I couldn’t vote for him in [2016] and I certainly cannot, in any way, support President Trump this year,” he added.
Asked if he will vote for Biden, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, Powell said yes.
“I’m very close to Joe Biden on a social matter and on a political matter,” Powell said. “I’ve worked with him for 35, 40 years. And he is now the candidate. And I will be voting for him.”
Former Secretary of State Colin Powell says he will be voting for former Vice President Joe Biden. “I certainly cannot, in any way, support President Trump this year.” #CNNSOTU pic.twitter.com/jmiUfDPhl1— State of the Union (@CNNSotu) June 7, 2020
Powell worked in four presidential administrations, serving most recently as secretary of state under President George W. Bush. Previously, he served as the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff under Presidents Bill Clinton and George H.W. Bush, and as national security adviser to President Ronald Reagan.
Advertisement


On Sunday, he slammed Congress for failing to hold Trump accountable for his constant lying.
“He lies about things, and he gets away with it because people will not hold him accountable,” Powell said. “While we’re watching him, we need to watch our Congress.”
Powell and others in the George W. Bush administration lied extensively while making the case for war in Iraq in the early 2000s, fabricating “evidence” of the existence of weapons of mass destruction within the country.
“We have a Constitution and we have to follow that Constitution and the President has drifted away from it,” Former US Secretary of State Colin Powell says he agrees with fellow former generals who have condemned President Trump’s actions against protesters. #CNNSOTU pic.twitter.com/Uni950ct8i— State of the Union (@CNNSotu) June 7, 2020
Following Powell’s interview Sunday, Trump bashed the former secretary of state as “a real stiff who was very responsible for getting us into the disastrous Middle East Wars.”
Several other high-profile Republicans have reportedly signaled they will not vote for Trump in November, including George W. Bush, Sen. Mitt Romney of Utah and Cindy McCain, widow of the late Arizona Sen. John McCain.
Advertisement


Some of the U.S. military’s top former leaders have spoken out against Trump in recent days. Two other former chairmen of the Joint Chiefs of Staff ― Ret. Adm. Michael Mullen and Ret. Gen. Martin Dempsey ― denounced the president’s threat to use military force against anti-racism protesters.
Ret. Gen. James Mattis, who resigned as Trump’s secretary of defense last year, condemned the president for dividing the nation in a statement published Wednesday in The Atlantic.
“Donald Trump is the first president in my lifetime who does not try to unite the American people—does not even pretend to try. Instead, he tries to divide us,” Mattis wrote. “We are witnessing the consequences of three years of this deliberate effort. We are witnessing the consequences of three years without mature leadership.”
Support HuffPostOur 2024 Coverage Needs YouYour Loyalty Means The World To UsAt HuffPost, we believe that everyone needs high-quality journalism, but we understand that not everyone can afford to pay for expensive news subscriptions. That is why we are committed to providing deeply reported, carefully fact-checked news that is freely accessible to everyone.Whether you come to HuffPost for updates on the 2024 presidential race, hard-hitting investigations into critical issues facing our country today, or trending stories that make you laugh, we appreciate you. The truth is, news costs money to produce, and we are proud that we have never put our stories behind an expensive paywall.Would you join us to help keep our stories free for all? Your contribution of as little as $2 will go a long way.As Americans head to the polls in 2024, the very future of our country is at stake. At HuffPost, we believe that a free press is critical to creating well-informed voters. That's why our journalism is free for everyone, even though other newsrooms retreat behind expensive paywalls.Our journalists will continue to cover the twists and turns during this historic presidential election. With your help, we'll bring you hard-hitting investigations, well-researched analysis and timely takes you can't find elsewhere. Reporting in this current political climate is a responsibility we do not take lightly, and we thank you for your support.Contribute as little as $2 to keep our news free for all.Dear HuffPost ReaderThank you for your past contribution to HuffPost. We are sincerely grateful for readers like you who help us ensure that we can keep our journalism free for everyone.The stakes are high this year, and our 2024 coverage could use continued support. Would you consider becoming a regular HuffPost contributor?Dear HuffPost ReaderThank you for your past contribution to HuffPost. We are sincerely grateful for readers like you who help us ensure that we can keep our journalism free for everyone.The stakes are high this year, and our 2024 coverage could use continued support. If circumstances have changed since you last contributed, we hope you’ll consider contributing to HuffPost once more.Support HuffPostAlready contributed? Log in to hide these messages.