Title: Conservative Activist Arrested Outside North Carolina Abortion Clinic for Allegedly Violating Coronavirus Rules

Spotlight: Conservative David Benham was arrested outside of a clinic in North Carolina over the weekend for allegedly violating the state and federal coronavirus rules. Prior to the outbreak, it was legal for pro-life advocates to gather at a certain distance outside of abortion clinics to offer women alternatives to ending the life of their unborn child.

Content Text:
David and his twin brother, Jason, gained fame as successful businessmen who were offered a show on the Home and Garden TV channel but were abruptly fired after their Christian worldview was revealed, including their support for traditional marriage between a man and a woman and respecting life from conception to natural death.
David Benham posted a video of his interaction with police on the brothers’ Facebook page.
“That abortion clinic exceeds the number of ten,” David Benham said, referring to the federal government guidance that no groups larger than ten people should gather in one place. 
David Benham told the police arresting him that he and the others outside of the clinic were there with a group that “helps at-risk mothers and babies.”
“We are within our rights to be here,” David Benham said. “We are practicing social distancing. We have cleaned our hands, and we are offering help to these mothers.”
“And if you are saying we don’t have the right to be here then go in the abortion clinic and make the arrests there,” Benham said to an officer, who said he did not have the authority to go inside the clinic.
“I appreciate your serving,” David Benham said. “I appreciate everything that you do for us, but this is wrong and you know it.”
The Christian Post reported on David Benham speaking with the Daily Wire about his arrest: 
Speaking to The Daily Wire, Benham said, “This is selective enforcement of the law. You are coming after us because we’re standing in front of an abortion clinic … I am not going to let the government have unlimited power and use this crisis to their advantage.”
Benham says his federally recognized public charity, Cities For Life, is considered an essential service. 
However, police officers claimed that more than 10 people had gathered, an accusation that Benham denied. 
Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX) offered his friend support on social media, calling the arrest unconstitutional.
“My friend David Benham was unconstitutionally arrested today in NC for peacefully providing pregnancy counseling outside an abortion clinic,” Cruz tweeted. “If NC deems abortion ‘essential,’ then pregnancy care services are as well. This is WRONG; Governor Cooper should be ashamed.”
WATCH: My friend David Benham was unconstitutionally arrested today in NC for peacefully providing pregnancy counseling outside an abortion clinic. If NC deems abortion “essential,” then pregnancy care services are as well. This is WRONG; Governor Cooper should be ashamed. 1/x https://t.co/eiNGJox2UR
— Ted Cruz (@tedcruz) April 4, 2020
The day after his arrest, David Benham tweeted about how North Carolina police seem to be selectively enforcing the coronavirus rules.
“There is clear bias against law-abiding #Prolife Christians. Parks are full in our city on Sat/Sun…no crowds broken up, but when I stand by myself at an abortion clinic I get arrested #ViewpointDiscrimination,” he tweeted.
There is clear bias against law-abiding #Prolife Christians. Parks are full in our city on Sat/Sun…no crowds broken up, but when I stand by myself at an abortion clinic I get arrested #ViewpointDiscrimination https://t.co/1gFsozoLjh
— David Benham (@DavidDBenham) April 6, 2020
Follow Penny Starr on Twitter.