Title: George Floyd, BLM protests take place on 3 continents

Content Text:
London protesters congregate at Hyde Park to protest international racial injustice. Fox News correspondent Greg Palkot with more.
Hundreds of demonstrators gather on the Champs de Mars as the Eiffel Tower is seen in the background during a demonstration in Paris, France, Saturday, June 6, 2020, to protest against the recent killing of George Floyd, a black man who died in police custody in Minneapolis, U.S.A., after being restrained by police officers on May 25, 2020. Further protests are planned over the weekend in European cities, some defying restrictions imposed by authorities because of the coronavirus pandemic. (AP Photo/Francois Mori) 
The protesters also chanted the name of George Floyd, an unarmed black man in Minneapolis who was allegedly killed by police after an officer kneeled on Floyd’s neck for almost nine minutes. Video footage of the entire incident became the spark for the current movement.
Demonstrators clench fists in Paris, France, Saturday, June 6, 2020, to protest against the recent killing of George Floyd, a black man who died in police custody in Minneapolis, U.S.A., after being restrained by police officers on May 25, 2020. Further protests are planned over the weekend in European cities, some defying restrictions imposed by authorities because of the coronavirus pandemic. (AP Photo/Michel Euler) 
The video struck a chord in black communities across the globe, driving protesters into the streets in Berlin, Paris, London and other cities in Europe.
“I was born French, on the day when we celebrate our country. But on a daily basis, I don’t feel that this country accepts me,” said Marie Djedje, a 14-year-old Parisian. “I know I’m going to have to fight twice as hard as the others. But I’m prepared.”
Thousands of people demonstrate in Cologne, Germany, Saturday June 6, 2020, to protest against racism and the recent killing of George Floyd by police officers in Minneapolis, USA. His death has led to Black Lives Matter protests in many countries and across the US. A US police officer has been charged with the death of George Floyd. (AP Photo/Martin Meissner) 
Paris attempted to discourage the protests due to concerns over the coronavirus, but the demonstrations continued, as locals likened their own plights to Floyd's. Jessica Corandi, a 37-year-old Paris Metro driver, cried when she saw the video of Floyd.
Chris Trabot, who works for Paris City Hall, described how Floyd’s death pushed him to finally protest for the first time in his life. He was born in Martinique, a French territory, and he described to The Associated Press how he faced racism for the color of his skin when his family moved to the mainland – treatment he sees echoed with his daughter, who has been targeted by classmates who mock her hair. 
Demonstrators hold placards during a Black Lives Matter rally in Parliament Square in London, Saturday, June 6, 2020, as people protest against the killing of George Floyd by police officers in Minneapolis, USA. Floyd, a black man, died after he was restrained by Minneapolis police while in custody on May 25 in Minnesota. (AP Photo/Alberto Pezzali) 
Munich police reported 20,000 people had gathered for protests, while thousands more participated in Frankfurt and Cologne. The UK has seen tens of thousands take to Green Park, Parliament Square and the streets along the River Thames in London, while 15,000 more took to the streets of Manchester, England, and 2,000 in Cardiff, Wales.
A man holds a placard during a demonstration in Paris, France, Saturday, June 6, 2020, to protest against the recent killing of George Floyd, a black man who died in police custody in Minneapolis, U.S.A., after being restrained by police officers on May 25, 2020. (AP Photo/Michel Euler) 
The First Peoples also suffer higher-than-average rates of infant mortality and poor health, with lower life expectancies. Protesters in Brisbane demanded the Indigenous flag raised over the police station. 
In Seoul protesters gathered while wearing masks and black shirts and carrying signs with “George Floyd Rest in Peace” and “Koreans for Black Lives Matter.”
People kneel to protest during a solidarity rally for the death of George Floyd in Seoul, South Korea, Saturday, June 6, 2020. Floyd died after being restrained by Minneapolis police officers on May 25.(AP Photo/Ahn Young-joon) 
“I urge the U.S. government to stop the violent suppression of (U.S.) protesters and listen to their voices,” said Jihoon Shim, one of the rally’s organizers. “I also want to urge the South Korean government to show its support for their fight (against racism).”
While many are concerned about the coronavirus pandemic spiking due to the protests, some, such as Andrew Francis, a black man from London, see the current fight for racial equality is “more important.” 
“We want change for our children and our children’s children’s to be able to have equality within the U.K, the U.S., all around the world.”
The Associated Press contributed to this report. 