Title: Warren plans to increase annual refugee admissions nearly 800 percent from FY2018

Content Text:
Dr. Alveda King calls Elizabeth Warren’s pay gap policy 'penalties.'
By the end of her first term, Warren said she would increase admissions to 175,000 per year with a ceiling of 125,000 in her first year in the White House. That first figure would be a massive increase (795 percent) over the roughly 22,000 admitted in FY2018 -- a result of President Trump's restrictionist approach that Warren decried on Thursday.
Trump has cautioned against allowing massive numbers of refugees to resettle through a vetting process that he and others have argued was inadequate for weeding out major security threats.
Warren's plan included a host of other policies that will likely find favor with other Democratic politicians. Among other things, she wants to repeal a law requiring local police to enforce federal immigration laws as well as end "unnecessary" detention.
"We already have the tools to effectively track and monitor individuals without shoving them into cages and camps along the border," she said. "As President, I’ll issue guidance ensuring that detention is only used where it is actually necessary because an individual poses a flight or safety risk."
It's unclear how many migrants Warren's team expected to detain or how they would handle those who crossed the border illegally but weren't deemed a flight or safety risk.
Trump's administration has come under fire from Warren and others for the allegedly inhumane conditions set up for migrants. Warren's plan would also institute a Justice Department task force to investigate allegations like medical neglect and sexual assaults, and have the authority to "pursue any substantiated criminal allegations."
Current and former immigration officials have pushed back on some of the detention depictions while the administration has blamed Democrats for, they say, failing to pass reforms that would fix the detention system.
"Let there be no ambiguity on this: if you are violating the basic rights of immigrants, now or in the future, a Warren administration will hold you accountable," she said.
Legal immigration would also expand under a Warren administration which would also decriminalize illegal border crossings. In lieu of legislation providing a path to citizenship, Warren said she would "take executive action to provide a measure of protection for those who are undocumented."
"I’ll work with Congress to pass broad-reaching reform, but I’m also prepared to move forward with executive action if Congress refuses to act," she said in her proposal.