Title: The ‘tech millionaire’ behind the socialist: Chief of staff who boosted AOC made riches in Silicon Valley

Content Text:
Conservative group files FEC complaint against Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and her chief of staff.
But behind the most influential democratic socialist in the country (sorry, Bernie) is an aide whose story is very different from the bartender background of Bronx-born Ocasio-Cortez.
Meet Saikat Chakrabarti. At 33, he came to Washington a wealthy tech entrepreneur, and now serves as the congresswoman’s chief of staff – or as he quips in his Twitter bio, “CoS to @AOC.”
From there, he shifted into the world of left-wing activism, where he worked for Sen. Bernie Sanders', I-Vt., 2016 presidential bid, before co-founding Brand New Congress -- an organization looking to launch left-wing candidates into Congress.
That in turn led to his co-founding of Justice Democrats -- the organization that seeks "to usher in a new generation of diverse working class leaders into the Democratic Party" and that propelled Ocasio-Cortez to her unlikely primary victory over then-Rep. Joe Crowley. During her longshot bid, Chakrabarti served as her campaign manager.
His journey from California to D.C. has apparently been a successful one.
Ocasio-Cortez has said there is no campaign finance violation.
“There is no violation,” Ocasio-Cortez exclusively told Fox News after landing Tuesday at Ronald Reagan National Airport. Asked if the complaint shows she was connected to "dark money" during the campaign, Ocasio-Cortez replied, “No, no.”
Chakrabarti did not return requests for comment from Fox News, but he defended the set-up on Twitter, saying, "We were doing something totally new, which meant a new setup. So, we were transparent about it from the start."
“He has big policy dreams, like a ‘Green New Deal,’ which would tackle everything from mitigating climate change to transforming the American economy, and criminal justice reform. He wants to lay the groundwork now to make them realities,” the article says.
The Green New Deal -- a pet project of left-wing activist groups -- has shot to the front of political conversation. In a sign of Ocasio-Cortez’s (and Chakrabarti’s) influence, within a month of her entering Congress, almost all the 2020 Democratic presidential hopefuls signed onto a non-binding resolution endorsing the enormous overhaul of the economy and energy use in America.
“What she was vocal about was the process by which it happened, the deal,” he said. “Amazon is the company that chose to step away from the negotiating table.”
Fox News' Gregg Re, Alex Pappas and Caroline McKee contributed to this report.