Title: Saudi Arabia closes its borders to air, sea travel amid coronavirus

Content Text:
'Dr. Oz Show' host Dr. Mehmet Oz joins Harris Faulkner to discuss the coronavirus outbreak on 'Outnumbered Overtime.'
“Out of concern to protect the health of citizens and residents and ensure their safety, the kingdom’s government decided to temporarily suspend the travel,” it said in a statement attributed to an unnamed Interior Ministry official.
Few worshippers were allowed to enter the Grand Mosque in Mecca after dawn prayers on Saturday to circumambulate the Kaaba over fears of coronavirus. (AP Photo/Amr Nabil) 
Worldwide, there are at least 109,577 cases confirmed cases of the new virus, with more than 3,800 deaths attributed to it. The number of people who have recovered is about 62,000.
Countries around the world have taken measures to impose travel controls and shut down large-scale public events as they brace for significant increases in virus cases.
Italian police officers and soldiers check passengers leaving from Milan main train station on Monday. (AP Photo/Antonio Calanni) 
The country has counted 7,375 cases of COVID-19, the illness caused by the coronavirus, and 366 deaths, more than any other country outside of Asia.
French President Emmanuel Macron and his wife Brigitte Macron on Monday walked down Paris' famous Champs-Elysees avenue in a move to send a message of confidence to the French economy amid the coronavirus crisis. (Yoan Valat, Pool via AP) 
“This is a difficult decision, but it's necessary to protect public health," Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said. "Public health comes before everything else."
In Egypt, the prime minister announced a temporary ban on large public gatherings and all events involving people’s movement between cities. Its southern tourist hub of Luxor announced the city would close to tourists Monday until medical experts could examine all hotel guests and cruise ship passengers in the area.
Qatar, Saudi Arabia’s neighbor, has cut off travel to 15 nations including, China, Egypt, Iran, Italy, South Korea, and Syria. The nation separately announced via its state-run news agency it would shut down schools and universities beginning Tuesday until further notice.
Iranian workers disinfect the shrine of the Shiite Saint Imam Abdulazim to help prevent the spread of the new coronavirus in Shahr-e-Ray, located south of Tehran, on Saturday. (AP Photo/Ebrahim Noroozi) 
Saudi Arabia’s state oil giant Saudi Aramco dropped by 10% on Riyadh's Tadawul stock exchange and forced a halt to Aramco's trading.
Fox News' Andrew O'Reilly and Frank Miles, and The Associated Press contributed to this report.