Title: Sen. Elizabeth Warren calls for getting rid of the Electoral College system

Content Text:
Sen. Elizabeth Warren called for eliminating the Electoral College in a Monday town hall in Mississippi.
The Democratic presidential contender told the crowd at Jackson State University that presidential candidates "don't come to places like Mississippi" during the general election while pointing out Mississippi is not a "battleground state."
"My view is that every vote matters. And the way we can make that happen is we can have national voting, and that means get rid of the Electoral College," she said, to large applause. 
Discussions over whether to change the Electoral college process sprout up every presidential election cycle. If you don't know, the Electoral College is the method by which electors from each state select the winner of a presidential election. Opponents of the Electoral College process often call for electing presidents by popular vote instead.
In February, Colorado became the 13th state to sign a compact in which the states would cast all of its electoral votes for the winner of the national popular presidential vote. In 2016, Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton won the popular vote over President Donald Trump by nearly 3 million votes.
At Monday's town hall, which was hosted by CNN, Warren also advocated for ditching the Mississippi state flag and frequently returned to a campaign theme centered on reducing income inequality. 
The audience, including a number of Jackson State students and staff, peppered the senator with questions during the roughly hour-long session hosted by Jake Tapper. Earlier in the day, she visited two Delta cities to promote a plan to improve affordable housing. 
More: Elizabeth Warren in Mississippi: What she said during stops in Delta before town hall
"I'm tired of a Washington that works for the rich and the powerful," Warren told the crowd at the start. "I want a Washington that works for the rest of America. That's why I'm in this fight."
Here are four takeaways from Warren's town hall: 
When someone asked her about how to ensure the rich pay their fair share in taxes, Warren became visibly excited. She loves the subject, and brings it up often on the campaign trail. One of her proposals is an "ultra-millionaires" tax, which would levy a new 2 percent tax on those with a net worth of $50 million or more, and 3 percent on those with assets over $1 billion.
She also pushed increased regulations for large corporations. And she has proposed breaking up large tech companies such as Apple, Google and Facebook, due to their alleged monopolistic practices. Large corporations, she said Monday, "want to run over whoever they want to run over," even if that includes their customers, their own employees or their local communities. 
"I believe in markets, and I believe in the value we get out of markets," she said. "But it's got to be markets with rules. Markets without rules is theft." 
Warren says she favors so-called "Medicare-for-all." But she's not sure yet how it would be best phased in. One idea she mentioned was gradually lowering the age Americans can qualify for the insurance benefit.
And she wouldn't say if such a plan would ultimately eliminate all private insurers in the country. "There could" be a role for private insurance offerings, she said. 
"America was founded on principles of liberty and freedom and on the backs of slave labor," Warren said. "This is a stain on America, and we're not going to fix that, we're not going to change that, until we address it directly."
She said addressing it could involve some type of reparations to African Americans, though she declined to say if that would include direct payments from the U.S. government.
Warren said the government also needs to address the legacy of redlining — the denial of certain housing and services to African Americans — and one way to do that would be to offer housing assistance for people living in formerly-redlined neighborhoods. 
"I believe in science," Warren said. "Climate change is real, it is man-made, and we're running out of runway to be able to fix this problem. We need all hands on deck with this one."
She advocated improving infrastructure to prepare for drastic weather and other climate change effects, as well as building more renewable energy sources. She also said the federal government needed to spend more money on climate change research and on developing clean vehicles. 
"This is truly the crisis that faces, not just our nation, but the world," Warren said. 
Follow Luke Ramseth on Twitter @lramseth