Title: Christians see 'alarming' trend worldwide as China builds 'blueprint of persecution'

Content Text:
Lauren Green reports on the disturbing trend of rising religious persecution in governments around the world.
"The Chinese government has now placed severe restrictions and policies on the house churches asking neighbors to spy on one another, pressuring school teachers and college professors to betray and sign a statement to denounce their own faith as well to do the same to students," Pastor Jian Zhu said.
"The drivers of persecution are still very significantly entrenched. Islamic extremism is spreading in Sub-Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia," David Curry, the president and CEO of Open Doors USA, told Fox News. "Then you add this rise of surveillance technology and strategy by China."
Every year, Open Doors USA, a bipartisan grassroots organization, has released a list of the 50 most dangerous countries for Christians. North Korea topped the list for the 19th year in a row, but China became the focus this year because of its forced labor camps and oppression of Uighur Muslims that's expected to spread and worsen.
Watchdog organization Open Doors USA released its annual "World Watch List" on Christian persecution, which is largely concentrated in Africa, the Middle East and Asia. (Open Doors USA)
While the communist country ranked 23rd on the list, roughly 100 million Christians have been affected by what Curry called "a blueprint for dictators around the world" that China already planned to sell to Iran and other countries.
"China is resurrecting the 'god as the government state,' and we're all threatened by it -- atheists, Jews, Christians -- everyone," Curry said.
While the list's top 10 countries were Muslim-majority nations, the focus on China highlighted three trends:
"Burkina Faso in Africa jumped from off the list to quite high on the list. It is 28 on the list," Curry warned. "The ISIS-affiliated group in Boko Haran in Nigeria is crossing borders: Cameroon, Chad, Niger and now Burkina Faso. If civil authorities don't protect Christian communities, as with ISIS, there could be another caliphate... It's very troubling."
And, similar to last year, Christan women continued to be raped and sexually harassed at alarming rates, an average of 23 per day.
"We cannot let this stand," Curry declared. "People are speaking out. They're crying out and have an obligation to take action."
Curry said the free world "must do more" to highlight the plight of persecuted Christians. But, he did add that "continued dialogue" in the wake of a phase-two trade deal with China could be seen as a pathway for better treatment of the faithful.