Title: Oprah Schools Instagram Hater With Receipts After Student Loan Diss

Spotlight: You get a clapback! You get a clapback! Everyone gets a clapback!

Content Text:
LOADINGERROR LOADING
Besides pretending to know the lyrics to every Mariah Carey song, Oprah Winfrey will always be remembered for her seemingly unending generosity.
In just the last few months, the media titan has surprised a New Jersey high school with a $500,000 gift, donated $2 million to relief efforts in Puerto Rico and shut down Saks Fifth Avenue to buy a $10,000 wedding dress for one of her students at the Oprah Winfrey Leadership Academy for Girls in South Africa. 
Advertisement


So, imagine the gall it would take to knock Winfrey for not being charitable enough.
That’s what happened when a salty Instagram user slid into the comments under a photo Winfrey posted celebrating the graduates of Colorado College, where she delivered a commencement address over the weekend. 
         View this post on Instagram            A post shared by Oprah (@oprah) on May 19, 2019 at 5:31pm PDT
“Should have paid off their student debt,” the follower wrote, tagging Morehouse College and adding an “lol.” 
The social media user was likely referring to the promise billionaire technology investor Robert F. Smith made over the weekend at Morehouse College to eliminate the graduating class’ student loans. The philanthropist is reportedly pledging to donate a total of $40 million to nearly 400 grads.
Advertisement


         View this post on Instagram            A post shared by Comments By Celebs (@commentsbycelebs) on May 19, 2019 at 6:44pm PDT
Winfrey didn’t mention paying off anyone’s loans at Colorado College. But in fact, she announced a $1 million donation to Morehouse College back in 1989, when she gave the commencement address there.
The gift established a fund that has since grown to $12 million and provided scholarships for over 400 men, making the former talk show host one of the institution’s top donors in its history. 
During the final episode of the “Oprah Winfrey Show,” some of the graduates that benefitted from the contribution surprised her by making their own $300,000 donation to the fund, bringing Winfrey and pretty much everybody in the audience to tears. 

Advertisement


Support HuffPostOur 2024 Coverage Needs YouYour Loyalty Means The World To UsAt HuffPost, we believe that everyone needs high-quality journalism, but we understand that not everyone can afford to pay for expensive news subscriptions. That is why we are committed to providing deeply reported, carefully fact-checked news that is freely accessible to everyone.Whether you come to HuffPost for updates on the 2024 presidential race, hard-hitting investigations into critical issues facing our country today, or trending stories that make you laugh, we appreciate you. The truth is, news costs money to produce, and we are proud that we have never put our stories behind an expensive paywall.Would you join us to help keep our stories free for all? Your contribution of as little as $2 will go a long way.As Americans head to the polls in 2024, the very future of our country is at stake. At HuffPost, we believe that a free press is critical to creating well-informed voters. That's why our journalism is free for everyone, even though other newsrooms retreat behind expensive paywalls.Our journalists will continue to cover the twists and turns during this historic presidential election. With your help, we'll bring you hard-hitting investigations, well-researched analysis and timely takes you can't find elsewhere. Reporting in this current political climate is a responsibility we do not take lightly, and we thank you for your support.Contribute as little as $2 to keep our news free for all.Dear HuffPost ReaderThank you for your past contribution to HuffPost. We are sincerely grateful for readers like you who help us ensure that we can keep our journalism free for everyone.The stakes are high this year, and our 2024 coverage could use continued support. Would you consider becoming a regular HuffPost contributor?Dear HuffPost ReaderThank you for your past contribution to HuffPost. We are sincerely grateful for readers like you who help us ensure that we can keep our journalism free for everyone.The stakes are high this year, and our 2024 coverage could use continued support. If circumstances have changed since you last contributed, we hope you’ll consider contributing to HuffPost once more.Support HuffPostAlready contributed? Log in to hide these messages.