Title: Heartland Institute accuses 'climate alarmists' of exploiting COVID-19 pandemic to advance agenda

Content Text:
Some activists say the coronavirus could be saving the planet; reaction from Mike Shellenberger, president of Environmental Progress.
"Not surprisingly coronavirus alarm has pushed most other issues and concerns out of the news ⎯ much to the dismay of climate alarmists," said Steve Milloy of the Heartland Institute. "But the alarmists aren’t taking displacement by coronavirus lying down. In fact, many climate alarmists are trying to use coronavirus as a means of advancing their agenda. They are trying to surf it."
Prominent figures also suggested Trump treated the coronavirus like he did climate change, that the pandemic was an opportunity to pursue "sustainable" growth, and that the pandemic was revealing the weaknesses of the world's economy.
In one example, Sky News' Ed Conway suggested that the coronavirus was "the ultimate weapon" against climate change. "Don’t take this the wrong way but if you were a young, hardline environmentalist looking for the ultimate weapon against climate change, you could hardly design anything better than coronavirus," he said in an op-ed posted by the Times.
The paper argued that Conway was highlighting the virus' "silver lining." According to CBS Los Angeles, clearing canals and emissions reductions were part of the "silver lining" of the pandemic as well.
The report also included statements from politicians like former President Barack Obama, who said the "consequences" of denying coronavirus warnings underscored the need to stop denying climate change.
Other examples seemed more restrained. "A friendly reminder: The coronavirus is not a good thing. We should not cheer its effects on reducing pollution," writer Eric Holthaus tweeted.
"The whole point of climate action is to save lives. If anything, this pandemic is proving we can (and will) rapidly eliminate fossil fuels."
One of the more egregious tweets came from a Twitter account tied to Extinction Rebellion, a left-wing environmentalist group.
"Earth is healing. The air and water is clearing. Corona is the cure. Humans are the disease," the tweet read.
Extinction Rebellion reportedly called that particular account -- XREastMidlands -- fake.
Fox News' James Rogers contributed to this report.