Title: Violent clashes erupt in India following vicious weekend attack on students, women

Content Text:
Fox News Flash top headlines for Jan. 7 are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com
The gruesome three-hour incident occurred between students of Jawaharlal Nehru University, who were protesting a fee hike on education, and youth wing members of Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, a group closely tied to India's ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).
Demonstrators attend a protest against attacks on the students of New Delhi's Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU), outside the Gateway of India monument in Mumbai, India, January 6, 2020. REUTERS/Francis Mascarenhas - RC2GAE9R168W 
BJP denied it had instigated the clashes and claimed without evidence that the attack was started by the left-leaning students.
Demonstrators shout slogans during a protest against the attacks on the students of New Delhi's Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) on Sunday, in Kolkata, India, January 6, 2020. REUTERS/Rupak De Chowdhuri - RC2CAE96VT8K 
Following Sunday's attack, videos of violence spread quickly over WhatsApp and were broadcast on television, sparking similar protests in Chandigarh, Bangalore, Mumbai, and Hyderabad.
Rapid Action Force (RAF) personnel stand guard as supporters of the youth wing of India's main opposition Congress party protest against the attacks on the students of Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) on Sunday, in New Delhi, India, January 6, 2020. REUTERS/Anushree Fadnavis - RC2FAE9PM8YZ 
The deputy commissioner of Kolkata Police eventually apologized for the bloodying of students - many of whom were women - and argued that tensions had risen too quickly. After blocking their path for nearly two hours, the students eventually marched on to the local police station to file a complaint against the officers who had beaten the female students.
Several colleges and universities across the country have been hit by the unrest following Sunday's attack. Despite video footage, no arrests have been made so far in the New Delhi attack.