Title: Hillary Clinton Joins NY Gov. Andrew Cuomo in Push for Very Late-Term Abortions

Spotlight: Failed Democrat presidential candidate Hillary Clinton joined with New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo to push for state legislation that will permit abortions “at any time” a patient’s health needs to be protected.

Content Text:
I’ll be joining @NYGovCuomo as he lays out his plan to codify Roe v. Wade and pass the Reproductive Health Act. There’s no time to wait. #RHAin30Days https://t.co/9DW9cfE9RD
— Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) January 6, 2019
Clinton and Cuomo announced Monday they would be urging a measure that would codify Roe v. Wade in New York’s law now that Democrats are in control of the state Senate. Such a bill has already passed the state Assembly in the past.
Today we are sending a strong message that we stand united in the fight to protect women’s rights. We must codify Roe v. Wade into state law and we must do it now. #RHAin30Days pic.twitter.com/buOUqKII3P
— Andrew Cuomo (@NYGovCuomo) January 7, 2019
Currently, New York law bans abortions past the 24thweek of pregnancy, unless the mother’s life is in danger.
The Reproductive Health Act (Senate Bill S2796), however, would allow abortion “within 24 weeks from the commencement of pregnancy, or there is an absence of fetal viability, or at any time when necessary to protect a patient’s life or health.”
Additionally, the bill eliminates any concept that an unborn baby is a “person.” The legislation ends criminal penalties for self-abortion and – in the case of an unborn baby who is the victim of a homicide – defines “person” as “a human being who has been born and is alive.”
Clinton and Cuomo welcomed the late-term abortion bill and criticized the pro-life Trump administration.
This year I am calling for a Constitutional Amendment that writes into the NY Constitution protection for a woman's right to control her own reproductive health. In this crazy political environment, we can’t take Roe v. Wade for granted. #RHAin30Days
— Andrew Cuomo (@NYGovCuomo) January 7, 2019
“Our right to make the most deeply personal decision is facing the most significant threats in recent memory,” Clinton said, reports Townhall. “This administration has rolled back access to reproductive health services at home and around the world and proposed cuts to international health development and diplomacy that put both women’s lives and our national security at risk.”
Cuomo, in turn, joked, “I love Hillary; don’t tell Bill.”
“The nation made a terrible mistake and I believe they regret it,” he added, referring to her 2016 loss to President Donald Trump. “Kavanaugh is going to reverse Roe v. Wade, I have no doubt, Gorsuch is going to reverse Roe v. Wade.”
Cuomo vowed not to pass a state budget “until the Reproductive Health Act and the Contraceptive Care Act have passed.”
Kathleen Gallagher, director of pro-life activities for the New York State Catholic Conference, told the Catholic Courier the bill will expand abortion within the state because it also “allows nondoctors to perform abortions” and “repeals protections that are currently in our law for babies who are accidentally born alive during an abortion.”
Pro-life activists and medical providers also note that allowing abortion “at any time” a patient’s “health” needs to be protected is purposefully vague.
During the failed attempt by pro-life activists in Ireland to save the Eighth Amendment that banned abortion, 24 Irish psychiatrists wrote, “To use ‘health’ as a justification for abortion, when the vast majority of abortions do not take place on any kind of health ground, inverts the true purpose of medicine and doctors.”
The doctors observed that, in the UK, 97 percent of the nearly 200,000 abortions occurring annually take place on the grounds of “mental health.”
In May, Steven Aden, chief legal officer & general counsel at Americans United for Life, told Breitbart News the Irish psychiatrists are “exactly right.”
“The American experience has been that allowing abortions for ‘mental health’ reasons opens the door to rubber-stamp abortions for any reason or no reason – abortion on demand,” he explained, noting the extent to which the term “health” is a catch-all.
“When the U.S. Supreme Court imposed abortion on all 50 states in 1973, it defined the ‘health’ exception for abortions at any time in pregnancy to include ‘all factors – physical, emotional, psychological, familial, and the woman’s age – relevant to the wellbeing of the patient,” Aden said. “All these factors may relate to health.’”
During her presidential campaign in 2016, Clinton said, “the unborn person doesn’t have constitutional rights.”