Title: 'A Coward And A Commander': Attack On Trump By Jim Mattis Stars In Lacerating Ad

Spotlight: Trump "dodged the draft" and now "hides from protesters in a deep bunker firing off tweets," mocks a new video by The Lincoln Project.

Content Text:

The Never Trumper Republicans of The Lincoln Project have mobilized former Defense Secretary Jim Mattis’s scathing broadside against the president in their latest attack on Donald Trump.
“This is the story of a coward and a commander,” begins the ad released Friday. It notes that Trump “dodged the draft,” and now the “frightened” president “hides from protesters in a deep bunker — firing off tweets.”
Advertisement


Mattis, a retired Marine Corps general, “does what he’s always done: leads” — and deserves to be heard by all Americans, the ad says.
The narrator reads some of the bombshell lines from a statement Wednesday by Mattis in The Atlantic: “Donald Trump is the first president in my lifetime who does not try to unite the American people — does not even pretend to try. Instead, he tries to divide us. We know that we are better than the abuse of executive authority. We must reject and hold accountable everyone who would make a mockery of our Constitution.”
Mattis attacked Trump for “militarizing” the response to protests triggered by the death of African American George Floyd during a brutal arrest by white officers in Minneapolis. Trump’s strategy “erodes the moral ground that ensures a trusted bond between men and women in uniform and the society they are sworn to protect,” he wrote.
The ad concludes: “Who do you trust: the coward or the commander?″
Check it out in the video up top.
Lincoln Project co-founder George Conway, who’s married to White House counselor Kellyanne Conway, piled on with another attack on Trump in an op-ed in The Washington Post on Friday. The president has failed miserably at handling the first serious challenges of his presidency: COVID-19 and the racial justice protests, Conway charged. They have not only revealed the incompetence of the “failing, flailing” president, but his inhumanity as well, Conway argued.
Advertisement


“Trump’s behavior is conscienceless, showing utter disregard for the safety of others, consistent irresponsibility, callousness, cynicism and disrespect of other human beings,” George Conway concluded. 
“We remain governed by a soulless man with a broken mind,” he warned. “The damage will continue, and it won’t stop until voters end it.”
Read George Conway’s entire piece in The Washington Post here.  
Support HuffPostOur 2024 Coverage Needs YouYour Loyalty Means The World To UsAt HuffPost, we believe that everyone needs high-quality journalism, but we understand that not everyone can afford to pay for expensive news subscriptions. That is why we are committed to providing deeply reported, carefully fact-checked news that is freely accessible to everyone.Whether you come to HuffPost for updates on the 2024 presidential race, hard-hitting investigations into critical issues facing our country today, or trending stories that make you laugh, we appreciate you. The truth is, news costs money to produce, and we are proud that we have never put our stories behind an expensive paywall.Would you join us to help keep our stories free for all? Your contribution of as little as $2 will go a long way.As Americans head to the polls in 2024, the very future of our country is at stake. At HuffPost, we believe that a free press is critical to creating well-informed voters. That's why our journalism is free for everyone, even though other newsrooms retreat behind expensive paywalls.Our journalists will continue to cover the twists and turns during this historic presidential election. With your help, we'll bring you hard-hitting investigations, well-researched analysis and timely takes you can't find elsewhere. Reporting in this current political climate is a responsibility we do not take lightly, and we thank you for your support.Contribute as little as $2 to keep our news free for all.Dear HuffPost ReaderThank you for your past contribution to HuffPost. We are sincerely grateful for readers like you who help us ensure that we can keep our journalism free for everyone.The stakes are high this year, and our 2024 coverage could use continued support. Would you consider becoming a regular HuffPost contributor?Dear HuffPost ReaderThank you for your past contribution to HuffPost. We are sincerely grateful for readers like you who help us ensure that we can keep our journalism free for everyone.The stakes are high this year, and our 2024 coverage could use continued support. If circumstances have changed since you last contributed, we hope you’ll consider contributing to HuffPost once more.Support HuffPostAlready contributed? Log in to hide these messages.