Title: New Study Shows How COVID-19 Might Affect Pregnant Women

Spotlight: Those with COVID-19 who are expecting may be less likely to show symptoms and more likely to give birth early, among other issues.

Content Text:
Pregnant women with COVID-19 are less likely to have symptoms, and may be more likely to give birth early, new research shows.
Compared with non-pregnant women of a similar age, researchers found pregnant and recently pregnant women with COVID-19 were less likely to report symptoms of fever and muscle pain (myalgia), but were more likely to need admission to an intensive care unit and need ventilation.
Advertisement


The study, published in the BMJ, found a quarter of all babies born to mothers with COVID-19 were admitted to a neonatal unit and were at increased risk of admission than those born to mothers without the disease. However, stillbirth and newborn death rates were low. 
The odds of giving birth prematurely was also higher in pregnant and recently pregnant women with COVID-19, compared to those without the disease. 
Advertisement




Pregnant women are thought to be a high-risk group for COVID-19, but reviews on COVID-19 in pregnancy quickly become outdated as new evidence emerges. So, a team of researchers began a more extensive review to compare the outcomes of COVID-19 in pregnant and recently pregnant women, with non-pregnant women of a similar age.
Their findings are based on 77 studies and outcomes for 11,432 pregnant and recently-pregnant women admitted to hospital and diagnosed as having suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
Advertisement


Maternal risk factors associated with severe COVID-19 were found to be increasing age, high body mass index, chronic high blood pressure, and pre-existing diabetes.
The researchers point to some study limitations that may have affected their results, but say healthcare professionals should be aware pregnant women with COVID-19 might need access to intensive care and specialist baby care facilities.
Mothers with pre-existing conditions will also need to be considered a high risk group for COVID-19, along with those who are obese and of older age, they add.
Edward Norris, president of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, calls the study a “welcome and comprehensive synthesis of the available research on COVID-19 in pregnancy.” 
“This study highlights a possible increase in the need for intensive care among pregnant women with coronavirus,” he told HuffPost UK. “This is also true for pregnant women should they contract flu. This year, it’s particularly important pregnant women take up the offer of the free flu vaccine, which is safe in all trimesters of pregnancy, to protect them from becoming seriously unwell.”
Advertisement


Norris added that the findings of this paper highlight the “need for more research into the effects of the virus on pregnant women and their babies” in order for health services to better respond to their needs. 
This story originally appeared in HuffPost UK.
Experts are still learning about COVID-19. The information in this story is what was known or available as of publication, but guidance can change as scientists discover more about the virus. Please check the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for the most updated recommendations.
Support HuffPostOur 2024 Coverage Needs YouYour Loyalty Means The World To UsAt HuffPost, we believe that everyone needs high-quality journalism, but we understand that not everyone can afford to pay for expensive news subscriptions. That is why we are committed to providing deeply reported, carefully fact-checked news that is freely accessible to everyone.Whether you come to HuffPost for updates on the 2024 presidential race, hard-hitting investigations into critical issues facing our country today, or trending stories that make you laugh, we appreciate you. The truth is, news costs money to produce, and we are proud that we have never put our stories behind an expensive paywall.Would you join us to help keep our stories free for all? Your contribution of as little as $2 will go a long way.As Americans head to the polls in 2024, the very future of our country is at stake. At HuffPost, we believe that a free press is critical to creating well-informed voters. That's why our journalism is free for everyone, even though other newsrooms retreat behind expensive paywalls.Our journalists will continue to cover the twists and turns during this historic presidential election. With your help, we'll bring you hard-hitting investigations, well-researched analysis and timely takes you can't find elsewhere. Reporting in this current political climate is a responsibility we do not take lightly, and we thank you for your support.Contribute as little as $2 to keep our news free for all.Dear HuffPost ReaderThank you for your past contribution to HuffPost. We are sincerely grateful for readers like you who help us ensure that we can keep our journalism free for everyone.The stakes are high this year, and our 2024 coverage could use continued support. Would you consider becoming a regular HuffPost contributor?Dear HuffPost ReaderThank you for your past contribution to HuffPost. We are sincerely grateful for readers like you who help us ensure that we can keep our journalism free for everyone.The stakes are high this year, and our 2024 coverage could use continued support. If circumstances have changed since you last contributed, we hope you’ll consider contributing to HuffPost once more.Support HuffPostAlready contributed? Log in to hide these messages.