Title: Judge Orders Infowars Founder Alex Jones To Pay $100,000 In Sandy Hook Lawsuit

Spotlight: The right-wing media personality, who claimed the 2012 Sandy Hook massacre was a hoax, was sued by the parent of a young boy slain in the attack.

Content Text:
LOADINGERROR LOADING
Conspiracy promoter and right-wing media personality Alex Jones has been ordered to pay $100,000 in court costs and legal fees stemming from a lawsuit over his claims that the 2012 Sandy Hook massacre of school children was a hoax, court records show.
Jones, founder of the Infowars radio show and webcast, has claimed the mainstream media and gun-control proponents conspired to fabricate the tragedy in which 20 school children and six school staff were shot dead at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Connecticut, on Dec. 14, 2012.
Advertisement


In response, several parents of the slain 6- and 7-year-old children sued Jones and Infowars for defamation and emotional distress in Texas, where Infowars is based, and in Connecticut.
In Texas, Travis County District Court Judge Scott Jenkins on Dec. 20 ordered Jones and Infowars to pay more than $100,000 in a case brought by Neil Heslin, whose 6-year-old son, Jesse Lewis, was killed at the school. The Daily Beast first reported the rulings on Monday.
Right-wing media personality Alex Jones has been ordered to pay $100,000 in a case brought by a man whose son was killed in the 2012 Sandy Hook shooting. Jones is facing several lawsuits for his claim that the 2012 massacre was a hoax pic.twitter.com/8aA4xQtwha— Reuters (@Reuters) December 31, 2019
The judge’s filings ordered Jones to pay more than $100,000 for failing to provide discovery, or evidence owed to the opposing side, and for filing a frivolous request to dismiss the case. In October, the same judge ordered Jones to pay another $25,875 for failing to respond to a previous discovery order.
Advertisement


Jones’ attorney, Wade Jefferies, said the lawsuit should be dismissed on freedom of speech grounds and said he would appeal the judge’s decision not to dismiss it. He also said the legal payments ordered by the judge were excessive.
“As to the actual amounts of attorney’s fees awarded, in my opinion, and every lawyer with knowledge of the case I have talked to agrees, the attorney’s fee awards are excessive,” Jefferies said in an email.
The Sandy Hook tragedy rocked the United States when a 20-year-old man shot and killed his mother at home and then went on a rampage at the school, also killing himself.
Jones began promoting the fiction that the event was staged. After conducting what he called “deep research,” Jones said in 2014 “the whole thing was fake.”
However, in a deposition linked to one of the suits, Jones later conceded that “children died and it’s a tragedy,” while also denying he had wronged the parents of the slain children.
Advertisement


Mark Bankston, an attorney representing Heslin and three other Sandy Hook parents, said Jones has “put a middle finger up to the court.”
“Hopefully these orders will have the effect of telling him there’s severe consequences for this,” Bankston said.
Support HuffPostOur 2024 Coverage Needs YouYour Loyalty Means The World To UsAt HuffPost, we believe that everyone needs high-quality journalism, but we understand that not everyone can afford to pay for expensive news subscriptions. That is why we are committed to providing deeply reported, carefully fact-checked news that is freely accessible to everyone.Whether you come to HuffPost for updates on the 2024 presidential race, hard-hitting investigations into critical issues facing our country today, or trending stories that make you laugh, we appreciate you. The truth is, news costs money to produce, and we are proud that we have never put our stories behind an expensive paywall.Would you join us to help keep our stories free for all? Your contribution of as little as $2 will go a long way.As Americans head to the polls in 2024, the very future of our country is at stake. At HuffPost, we believe that a free press is critical to creating well-informed voters. That's why our journalism is free for everyone, even though other newsrooms retreat behind expensive paywalls.Our journalists will continue to cover the twists and turns during this historic presidential election. With your help, we'll bring you hard-hitting investigations, well-researched analysis and timely takes you can't find elsewhere. Reporting in this current political climate is a responsibility we do not take lightly, and we thank you for your support.Contribute as little as $2 to keep our news free for all.Dear HuffPost ReaderThank you for your past contribution to HuffPost. We are sincerely grateful for readers like you who help us ensure that we can keep our journalism free for everyone.The stakes are high this year, and our 2024 coverage could use continued support. Would you consider becoming a regular HuffPost contributor?Dear HuffPost ReaderThank you for your past contribution to HuffPost. We are sincerely grateful for readers like you who help us ensure that we can keep our journalism free for everyone.The stakes are high this year, and our 2024 coverage could use continued support. If circumstances have changed since you last contributed, we hope you’ll consider contributing to HuffPost once more.Support HuffPostAlready contributed? Log in to hide these messages.