Title: Deroy Murdock: Trump's latest Mideast peace deal buried by ABC, CBS, NBC in sand dune

Spotlight: All we are saying is: Give peace deals a chance

Content Text:
State Department Spokesperson Morgan Ortagus talks to 'Fox &amp; Friends Weekend' about Trump's latest Middle East peace deal.
B-O-R-I-N-G!
And with Sudan — a former U.S. government-designated state sponsor of terrorism — now in from the cold, this is much-welcome news for those with little taste for truck bombs. Sudan once hosted Hamas, Hezbollah, and none other than Usama bin Laden.
“GREAT news! New government of Sudan, which is making great progress, agreed to pay $335 MILLION to U.S. terror victims and families,” President Trump announced via Twitter. “Once deposited, I will lift Sudan from the State Sponsors of Terrorism list. At long last, JUSTICE for the American people and BIG step for Sudan!”
As part of its rehabilitation, Sudan agreed on Friday to do something that must have bin Laden spinning in his watery grave: affirm Israel’s right to exist and exchange diplomats with the Zionist nation.
All of this is highly encouraging and, if nothing else, newsworthy.
Wrong!
At least as defined by the Big Three network evening news programs, this development deserved no attention whatsoever. ABC’s World News Tonight, The CBS Evening News, and NBC Nightly News each devoted zero minutes and zero seconds to this story.
Amid all the other headlines, perhaps they could not shoehorn even a mention of this foreign-affairs victory for President Trump.
Not quite.
These are touching, heartwarming tales. Who doesn’t love generous adolescents, cheerful chipmunks, and newborns spared from tragedy? But doesn’t a major step forward overseas merit at least a passing wave from America’s brave news anchors? Why not a few seconds of relevant footage with brief, sonorous voice-overs?All we are saying is: Give peace deals a chance.
“With such news priorities, the networks continue to demonstrate why they have alienated so many who dismiss them as ‘fake news,’” said MRC’s Brent Baker. “Refusing to cede even 10 or 15 seconds to a major peace deal in the Middle East? Just because the president involved is named Trump, and they cannot countenance giving him a win days before the election?”
That is the really big news here: The three major networks, like most of the dinosaur media, are so diabolically possessed with hatred for Donald J. Trump that they actively conceal virtually anything that shines a positive light on the president — especially as they labor sedulously for his defeat on November 3.
Manhattan-based political commentor Deroy Murdock is a Fox News contributor.