Title: Illegal immigrants rescued at border wall in California after 'precarious situation'

Content Text:
U.S. Customs and Border Protection came to the rescue of three people after agents on patrol saw them perched on top of the San Diego border wall. The trio were Mexican citizens illegally trying to cross into the United States.
“These three were very fortunate to not have fallen from the top of the wall, which could have resulted in serious injury or death,” CBP San Diego Sector’s Acting Chief Patrol Agent Aaron Heitke said in a statement. “These dangers are not important considerations to smugglers, who place an emphasis on profits over safety.”
The trio ended up on the wet, slippery wall after smugglers abandoned them, which officials said left them in "a precarious situation."
Agents called in firefighters with San Diego Fire Department to get the group down safely using a ladder truck
Three people were stuck on top of the new border wall around midnight on Sunday in San Diego. (U.S. Customs and Border Protection)
A 36-year-old male, a 20-year-old female, and an 18-year-old female were transported to a nearby Border Patrol station for processing. Officials did not say how they got on top of the wall.
The two barriers in San Diego sector (U.S. Border Patrol)
The new construction replaced 8-foot landing mats, usually supported by a steel mesh behind them.
The project to install 14 miles of replacement barriers began in May 2018 and is now complete. The secondary project began in February 2019 and it includes 2 miles of wall that did not exist before, officials say.
Trump visited the San Diego project in September and described it in glowing terms — even signing his name on the barrier.
Fourteen miles of old border fencing from the 1990s has been replaced in San Diego, Calif., with another 14 miles of secondary fencing being added. William La Jeunesse reports from the border.
“So it’s a very powerful, very powerful wall, the likes of which, probably, to this extent, has not been built before,” he said.
"But the numbers now are way down," he later added. "And as the wall goes up — literally, as the wall goes up, the numbers go down."
Fox News' Adam Shaw contributed to this report.