

        'The dumbest person alive': Video reveals how painfully and dangerously wrong Trump has been about the coronavirus
    
When President Donald Trump addressed the coronavirus crisis during an Oval Office speech on Wednesday night, he had a somber tone and acknowledged that coronavirus had become a “pandemic” — which is what the World Health Organization had officially declared it to be. But that speech followed weeks of Trump and his apologists downplaying the severity of the outbreak. And a video posted on Twitter by “The Daily Show” illustrates how painfully clueless Trump has been about a pandemic that, as of early Friday afternoon, had killed more than 5,000 people worldwide, according to the Center for Systems Science and Engineering at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.
Titled “Pandumic,” the video shows a collage of clips in which Trump makes ridiculous claims about coronavirus — and the president is contradicted by statements from people who actually know what they’re talking about.
During the video, text on the screen declares, “The deadly coronavirus is spreading…. and the man in charge is the dumbest person alive.” A clip of CNN’s Alisyn Camerota reporting that the number of coronavirus cases in the U.S. had “risen to 732” is followed by a clip of Trump claiming, “We’re going to be, pretty soon, at only five people, and we could be at just one or two people over the next short period of time.”

The text on the screen denounces Trump as “a man immune to information” before a reporter is heard saying that according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Americans should “avoid shaking hands” — and Trump is seen shaking numerous hands.
The video also shows Trump claiming that a coronavirus vaccine will be available “relatively soon” — only to be contradicted by Dr. Robert Kadlec of the Department of Health and Human Services (DHS). On C-Span, Kadlec asserts that a “reasonable expectation” for a coronavirus vaccine is somewhere between “a year and 18 months, honestly.” And a clip of Trump insisting that “anybody who wants a (coronavirus) test can get a test” is followed by a clip of Dr. Anthony Fauci, a leading immunologist, explaining that in the U.S., “There has been a lag in the ability to get tested.”