Title: War criminals among us: Inside the quiet effort to prosecute and deport violators disguised as refugees

Content Text:
War criminals among us: A look inside the effort to prosecute and deport violators disguised as refugees.
For decades, war criminals have lived alongside those they tortured or displaced. Under the guise of being a refugee, they've sought new lives in America. But quiet efforts are underway to expose and punish as many of these hidden offenders as possible -- and ensure none find a lasting haven in the U.S.
“What survivors want is for the truth to come out through the due process,” Dixon Osburn, Executive Director of the Center for Justice & Accountability told Fox News. “When we prove with evidence, that is really empowering for individuals who have suffered.”
A jury awarded the torture survivor some $500,000 in damages in the CJA case.
It marked the third CJA victory in cases brought against those who committed shocking human rights violations dating back to the early ’90s war in Somalia alone. Yet it's merely the tip of the iceberg of war criminals lurking -- and working -- on U.S. turf.
“In one case years ago, there was a Haitian commander who was living in Miami and appeared on television after winning the lottery. One of his victims saw it and said, ‘wait a minute,’” Osburn recalled, highlighting one of the more than a dozen investigations currently ongoing, ranging from commanders and criminal town mayors to narco-traffickers and other foreign perpetrators. “Never again means never again, and we are doing what we can as members of civil society. We hope each case stands for something bigger.”
Khmer Rouge soldiers atop US-made armored vehicles in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, in April 1975. (SJOBERG/AFP/Getty Images, File) 
Using any means at its disposal -- litigation, transnational justice, policy advocacy -- to bring human rights abusers to justice, CJA has taken on cases involving crimes from areas ranging from El Salvador and Guatemala; to the Balkans, the Horn of Africa, Rwanda, Ethiopia, Sierra Leone, Chile, Somalia and beyond.
The firm has successfully represented 45 Cambodian Americans in taking on senior Khmer Rouge officials responsible for carrying out mass genocide, starvation and other atrocities in the 1970s under the repressive rule of the Communist Party of Kampuchea. And in the aftermath of the Bosnian War, CJA – on behalf of torture victims – took on Nikola Vuckovic, who had been able to enter the U.S. as a refugee and lead a quiet life in Atlanta before being accused of subjecting his Muslim neighbors to torture at the height of the conflict.
FILE- In this May 13, 2013, file photo, the photo of Journalist Marie Colvin who was killed in Syria while she was reporting from there, is seen on the wall of the Newseum during the Journalist Memorial Re-dedication ceremony of the journalists who died reporting the news in 2012 in Washington. (AP)
Leading the charge on the U.S. government front is the Human Rights Violators War Crimes Center – which was instituted by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement more than a decade ago and is operated by Homeland Security Investigations. With an interagency approach and a growing team of about 50 analysts, researchers, attorneys and investigators focused on different geographic regions of the world, the HRVWCC relentlessly investigates individuals residing within the United States, or U.S. persons abroad, suspected of having executed serious human rights violations, including genocide, torture and war crimes.
“When conflicts happen, perpetrators find themselves in the mix of the refugee or displaced persons’ flow. Over time, sometimes we can find out fairly quickly and other times it takes ten or fifteen years for someone to come to us and say ‘hey, this guy did this back in my country,’” HRVWCC Chief Mark Shaffer told Fox News.
Since 2003, ICE has arrested more than 415 individuals for human rights-related violations under an array of criminal and/or immigration statutes. During that same 16-year period, Fox News has learned, ICE obtained deportation orders against and physically removed more than 900 known or suspected human rights violators and has facilitated the departure of 152 others from U.S. soil.
HRVWCC has issued more than 75,000 lookouts for individuals from more than 110 countries and stopped over 300 human rights violators and war crime suspects from entering the country.
U.S. Border Patrol agents make arrests as they hold a line during a pro-migration protest by members of various faith groups showing support for Central American asylum-seekers who arrived in recent caravans and calling for an end to migrant detentions and deportations, in San Diego as seen through the border fence from Tijuana, Mexico, Monday, Dec. 10, 2018. (AP Photo/Rebecca Blackwell)
As it stands, HSI has more than 170 active investigations into suspected human rights violators and is currently pursuing more than 1600 leads and removal cases involving suspected human rights violators in the U.S.
Where possible, the HRVWCC teams up with the U.S. Department of Justice to pursue criminal prosecutions pegged to one of four specific areas – genocide, torture, war crimes and recruitment or use of child soldiers – but most often, authorities instead have to turn to the Immigration and Nationality Act and use administrative charges of immigration fraud. This often involves individuals having failed to disclose their nebulous past professions or validating themselves as being of high moral standing.
“So we use what we call the 'Al Capone method,' where we'll use every tool that we have in the toolbox to try and bring some type of justice to these cases,” explained Mona Ragheb, a senior legal advisor with DHS and one of the specialized unit’s few founding members. “We look at each case and try to find a criminal statute that will fly.”
Ragheb also pointed out that the Torture Statute was enacted in 1994 and the legislation against those who recruit child soldiers was enacted in 2008, so, while the unit encounters many examples of those who committed such violations before that date, they are not able to prosecute the offenders criminally on those grounds, meaning they have to turn to the immigration violations.
In one case, a 47-year-old Rwandan man, Jean Leonard Teganya, earlier this month was sentenced to at least eight years in prison for lying about the role he played in the country’s 1994 genocide in order to be granted asylum in the United States.
Jean Leonard Teganya, a Rwandan man who U.S. prosecutors said participated in the African nation's 1994 genocide and who was convicted in April of lying in hope of gaining asylum in the United States, is seen in this undated photo. (U.S. Attorney's Office for the District of Massachusetts/Handout)
Even Nazi war criminals in the U.S. have come under the glare in recent decades.
FILE - In this Nov. 20, 2003 file photo, Jakiw Palij, a former Nazi concentration camp guard, stands in front of a building in the Queens borough of New York. The White House says that Palij, a 95-year-old former Nazi concentration camp guard has been deported to Germany, 14 years after a judge ordered his expulsion. In a statement, the White House said the deportation of Palij, who lived in New York City, was carried out early Tuesday, Aug. 21, 2018. (Suzanne DeChillo/The New York Times via AP, File)
Former head of the Vilnius region security police under Nazi occupation, Aleksandras Lileikis, listens during a trial November 5.  
While the overwhelming majority of those exposed are male, female war criminals are among the mix, too.
HRVWCC’s team also works to ensure human rights violators are prohibited from future entry, what they deem a “preventative mission.”
“It’s a team of intelligence research specialists who specialize in a particular region of the world, or on a specific conflict,” Shaffer said. “Usually the information we gather is enough to prevent (an involved individual) from entering the United States.”
Nonetheless, for some victims, justice is held up by a fear of coming forward. One California-based Iraqi, who fled to the U.S. amid the U.S.-led operation in 2003 after being threatened by Baghdad militias because of his work for American contractors, told Fox News the very person who threatened his family and firebombed a relative’s house was believed to be in Texas, according to the man's social media. Yet the victim – still afraid for his family and insisting he wants nothing more than a drama-free, quiet life – said he just wants the matter to go away.
“If there is no investigation and no prosecution, often there is no justice for these victims – ever,” Ragheb stressed. “We always say never forget and never again, and we always hope our work here can persuade countries who might have amnesty to also live like that.”