Title: Pence denies systemic racism, Harris decries Trump administration 'pattern' of racism in historic debate

Content Text:
Sen. Kamala Harris, vying to be the first Black and Asian American vice president, slammed President Donald Trump's record on race at the vice presidential debate Wednesday. Vice President Mike Pence denied that systemic racism is an issue in the USA. 
The two sparred over race relations as the nation reels from several high-profile police killings of Black people this year that led to widespread civil rights protests amid a historic pandemic and economic crisis, both of which have disproportionately hurt people of color. 
Harris criticized Trump for not condemning white supremacy at various points during his presidency. Trump set off a firestorm during last week's presidential debate when he urged the Proud Boys, a violent far-right group, to "stand back and stand by." The White House said the president has "always denounced" any form of white supremacy, despite evidence to the contrary. 
Harris accused Trump of a "pattern" of racism, citing his ban on several Muslim-majority nations, labeling Mexicans rapists and criminals during his campaign launch and his statement that there were "fine people on both sides" at a white nationalist rally in Charlottesville, Virginia, in 2017, when a counterdemonstrator was killed by a white supremacist. 
"This is who we have as the president of the United States," Harris said. "America, you deserve better."
Pence said he didn't believe systemic racism exists in the USA when moderator Susan Page, USA TODAY's Washington Bureau chief, asked about Breonna Taylor, 26, a Black woman who was fatally shot by police in Louisville, Kentucky, as plainclothes officers served a no-knock warrant at her apartment in March. Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron announced last month that the three officers will not be charged for killing her. Officer Brett Hankison, the only officer indicted by a grand jury, pleaded not guilty to charges of wanton endangerment for shooting into another home.
Pence and Harris disagreed on whether “justice was served” in Taylor's case. 
“Her family deserves justice," Harris said. "Her life was taken unjustifiably and tragically and violently.”
Harris said it reminded her of the death of George Floyd, 46, a Black man who died after a Minneapolis police officer knelt on his neck for nearly nine minutes. Both deaths fueled Black Lives Matter protests across the country.  
Pence said, “Our heart breaks for any American innocent life. ... But I trust our justice system – a grand jury that reviews the evidence.”
Pence said there is “no excuse” for what happened to Floyd, but he condemned the rioting and looting that happened in response.
The vice president called it a “great insult” to law enforcement that Biden said there is implicit bias against people of color in law enforcement agencies.
“We don’t have to choose between supporting law enforcement, improving public safety and supporting our African American neighbors and all of our minorities,” Pence said. “Under President Trump’s leadership, we will always stand behind law enforcement.”
Black Americans are three times more likely than white Americans to be killed by police, according to a study published this year by the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. 
Harris said the Biden administration will introduce criminal justice changes, including a chokehold ban, national registries for police officers who break the law and the elimination of private prisons and cash bail.
Biden said he would not support defunding police as many protesters demand. 
Harris noted Trump’s failure to appoint people of color to positions of power. She didn't answer Pence's question about whether a Biden administration would add judges to the Supreme Court but pointed out that not one person among the 50 Trump has appointed to the Court of Appeals is Black.