

        Here's how the coronavirus crisis could truly spiral out of control
    
With President Donald Trump signaling that he's eager for the country to relax stringent measures meant to stem the tide of the Covid-19 pandemic, it's important to realize how dangerous this idea is. While we will eventually need to get the economy back on its feet, trying to do so too early could have extremely disastrous consequences.
We shouldn't exaggerate the risks of a spiraling crisis and induce panic, but it's also crucial that we recognize potentially large downsides to mismanagement of the virus, even if they have a low probability of occurring. Accurately assessing the worst possible outcomes can help encourage us to adopt and stick to mitigation measures that we need now, even if they are genuinely painful. This is especially true when the president and much of right-wing media are itching to roll back mitigation measures out of fear that the economic cost is too great. Trump can't roll back the shutdowns and stay-at-home orders issued by state and local governments, but he can use the bully pulpit to sour his followers and his political allies on these tactics. And this would be a huge mistake.
So what might be a worst-case scenario if we start rolling back the measures prematurely? Blogger Steve Randy Waldman, writing at Interfluidity, painted a terrifying picture.
While many workers are out of job and staying home right now because of the pandemic, he pointed out, many others are continuing to work much like normal because they work in essential industries. This means doctors, nurses, and other medical personnel, of course, but also grocery store workers, police, truckers, delivery workers, people in agriculture, and others.
By social distancing and staying at home, people who are not in key industries help make it possible for these workers to continue doing their vital jobs.
"It is making a huge positive contribution to our society, by delaying the moment when it will be impossible to persuade a critical mass of these very essential workers to do their jobs, because many of them are sick and the rest of them are too afraid of getting sick," Waldman wrote.
If we people stop social distancing and return to life as normal, the virus will start spreading at an even more rapid clip. And even though the mortality rate is relatively low for younger groups, an overwhelmed medical system means more people will die. And that means more people will know someone who died.
"People you personally know suffering and dying around you will be much more salient, and much more terrifying, than any risk you have ever experienced," Waldman explained. "Exhortations by the best and brightest — who would, after all, have permitted this to happen, in whom no great trust by this point would repose — will not be effective. The factories that should be producing the equipment that might save doctors’ will be too understaffed to function, let alone increase production. The trucks will slow to a trickle. The groceries will close."
This is where the real danger is. If people in essential industries start getting sick too frequently, and too many of them are terrified to go to work, then we start to face real shortages of essential services and items. This means the crisis isn't just a medical crisis or an economic crisis, but a societal crisis. Shortages of necessities means distrust and chaos across society.
Waldman noted, of course, that all this should be preventable if we follow the public health advice and comply with social distancing.
None of this is guaranteed, of course. But when we're staring at the face of a crisis with many unknowns, we should be aware of the risks before proceeding forward. And right now, far too much commentary is focused exclusively on the economic costs of shutdowns and on the potential mortality rate of the disease. But the far-reaching consequences of a poorly managed response could be much greater than either of these.
And there are ways out of the shutdown we're under, eventually. Dr. Tom Frieden, a former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, explained in a recent piece for CNN that we'll need an extensive regime of testing and tracing for the virus to limit community spread even after we start trying to resume normal life, which is still many weeks or months away. He described what this will require:
Eventually, if a successful vaccine can be discovered and if more people gain immunity in a year or two, we may be able to put this frightening chapter in the world's history behind us. But right now, the risks are quite real and, despite all we've seen, they are still not being taken seriously enough.