Title: Welcome To Your New World Order: A Rundown Of Woke Insanity Amid The Newest Cultural Revolution

Content Text:
America is in the midst of a new cultural civil war that for years has been brewing under the surface as left-wing academics breed aggressively woke children now permeating throughout the nation’s mainstream institutions.
Since the killing of George Floyd at the knees of a Minneapolis police officer sparked the worst outbreak of civil unrest in decades, protests that grew out of demanding justice for Floyd morphed into a dark operation to fundamentally transform the nation’s psyche, convincing the people of their own inherent evil from ancestral wrongs.
Battle lines are clearly being drawn, where the radical left has offered Americans a binary choice in a false dichotomy between total submission or unrelenting exile with those opposed to the new woke world order cast out of society as unrepentant racists refusing to atone for past generations’ sins. No justice, no peace. Silence is violence. You’re either with us, or against us. There is no middle ground. Which side of history are you on?
Of course in reality, (and sanity), it’s clearly not that black and white, but if recent events show us anything, they expose that this mentality is no longer one of a fringe left-wing movement but a central tenet of our mainstream culture of what it means to make “progress.” America, according to the now only acceptable narrative, is an irredeemably racist society that was built for the sole purpose to oppress. It has never been great. Anyone who thinks otherwise, is as guilty as the slaveholders who lived more than 150 years ago.
For as long as the nation continues to go mad, purging books, movies, statues and history in its own cultural revolution launched by woke elites, The Federalist will be chronicling its destruction, updating this list with each new event in its collapse. The Federalist will also be keeping tally of those fired from lack of allegiance to the new woke overlords found here.
Updated Aug. 4, 2020
An immigrant-owned business in Louisville, Ky., saw protestors gather in support of the restaurant in early August after a Black Lives Matter group sent them a letter with a list of demands that included filling at least 23 percent of positions with black employees and ensuring at least 23 percent of inventory came from black retailers while providing diversity training at least twice a year.
According to the Courier-Journal, demonstrators told the restaurant owner Fernando Martinez that he “better put [the list of demands] on the door so your business is not f–d with.”
“How can I be called a bigot and a racist when my family is black? When my son is gay?” Martinez said to a crowd of supportive protestors. “I’m the proud father of a gay son, and I’m gonna fight for him against anybody.” 
Kneeling for the national anthem at sporting events to protest America as an evil and racist empire was once something a few players did on occasion. Now, it appears those who stand in respect for the nation must explain themselves.

Rather amazing how quickly we went from “people should be able to kneel during the anthem as a form of protest” to “anyone who doesn’t kneel during the anthem must explain themselves”. https://t.co/7UCYRRr1Sc
— AG (@AGHamilton29) August 1, 2020


"I believe that Black Lives Matter. Kneeling while wearing a Black Lives Matter t-shirt doesn't go hand-in-hand with supporting Black lives."
– Jonathan Isaac (via @Krisplashed) pic.twitter.com/RvdvxAsfVK
— NBA Central (@TheNBACentral) July 31, 2020


'I'm A Christian': MLB Player Defends Being The Only Player To Not Kneel Before The National Anthem https://t.co/W6yClTctqK
— Daily Caller (@DailyCaller) July 26, 2020

Freshman Democratic Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York complained about the presence of a statue commemorating Hawaii’s Father Damien in the halls of Capitol Hill as celebrating white supremacy.
“This is what patriarchy and white supremacist culture looks like!” Ocasio-Cortez wrote on a story posted to Instagram story. “It’s not radical or crazy to understand the influence white supremacist culture has historically had in our overall culture & how it impacts the present day.”
Father Damien however, voluntarily spent years caring for exiled patients dying of leprosy until dying of the disease himself.
https://twitter.com/johnrobertgage/status/1289216440088662016?s=20
The NFL announced in July it would be transforming art in end zones into billboards to support the Black Lives Matter movement with text reading, “End Racism” and “It Takes All of Us.”

The NFL informed clubs today of plans to amplify its social justice initiatives, including helmet decals and signage in end zones for kickoff games and club home openers. pic.twitter.com/p4lt27tmEY
— Tom Pelissero (@TomPelissero) July 27, 2020

A new poll from the libertarian-leaning Cato Institute shows 44 percent of Americans under the age of 30 believe it’s the right thing to do for employers to fire staff who had donated to the Trump campaign.
The same survey found 62 percent of Americans tend to self-censor their own political views “because others might find them offensive.”
The Sierra Club moved to sever ties to its more than 100-years-deceased founder, John Muir for racist statements in the context of the 21st century even after a study from the organization deemed Muir’s views as progressive for their time.
The New York Times meanwhile, published an op-ed complaining that the national parks are too white and unwelcoming to minorities.
A donation-based Denver yoga chain which held special classes for minorities and LGBT people was forced to shut down after community activists derided the company as an institution of white supremacy.
Former employees complained that the studio’s refusal to hire a diversity expert contributed to the hostile environment at the company holding certain classes where “white friends and allies,” were unwelcome. Staff also aired grievances over the yoga studio’s decision to hold a photo shoot featuring minority employees for its website that was meant to appease complaints that its website was too white centric. Staff accused the studio of “tokenism.”
Just days after 49 police officers were injured protecting a statue of Christopher Columbus in Grant Park, the statue was removed at the Democratic mayor’s request while the city suffocates under a historic crime wave.
A public high school social studies teacher in Michigan was fired for declaring on social media that “Trump is our president” in July.
According to the Detroit News, Justin Kucera, 28, was offered his job back after the story went viral but declined noting “the issue would follow him into the classroom.”
Dallas Mavericks owner Mark Cuban refused to criticize the Chinese Communist Party’s takeover of Hong Kong chalking up the death of freedom in an overseas territory as merely a domestic issue.

I can say Black Lives Matter. I can say there is systemic racism in this country. I can say there is a Pandemic that you have done little to end.  I can say I care about this country first and last and.. https://t.co/URFs41XloY
— Mark Cuban (@mcuban) July 20, 2020

On July 14, North Carolina’s Asheville City Council voted unanimously to pass reparations for slavery in the form of targeted spending in communities to help black residents.
The passed resolution 7-0 apologizes for North Carolina’s role in the more than 150-year extinct American practice generations ago.
“It is simply not enough to remove statues. Black people in this country are dealing with issues that are systemic in nature,” said Councilman Keith Young, who is one of two African-Americans on the council.
The National Museum of African History & Culture (NMAAHC) began promoting new material seeking to explain “Aspects & Assumptions of Whiteness & White Culture.”
Some key identifying characteristics of “whiteness” the federal museum explains, include possessing a “master and control nature,” “aggressiveness and extroversion,” “heavy value on ownership of goods, space, property,” a taste in “steak and potatoes; ‘bland is best,'” and “no tolerance for deviation from single god concept,” so be sure to watch out for these signs when interacting with others to steer clear of white people.
The Los Angeles Times ran an op-ed on July 14 demanding the nation abandon the “Star Spangled Banner” for “Lean on Me.” The piece’s author, New York Times columnist Jody Rosen, said the patriotic tribute served as a crude relic of a racism.
Oprah Winfrey announced in mid-July that she’ll be joining forces with Liongate to bring to life New York Time’s revisionist-history project with feature films and television programs.
“From the first moment I read ‘The 1619 Project and immersed myself in Nikole Hanna-Jones’s transformative work, I was moved, deepened and strengthened by her empowering historical analysis,” Winfrey said.
World of Beer distributed one of their latest products in packaging made to resemble white Klansmen from the KKK. It was quickly cancelled.
https://twitter.com/Jilchrest/status/1282741485956456448?s=20
Legacy media piled on President Trump for simply stating that more white people are shot to death by police than black people.

I'm confused, what's the problem? That's factually accurate. This is the number of people shot to death by police by race 2017-2020. https://t.co/LvMJ6qdIsO pic.twitter.com/YKCucSjli2
— Ben Shapiro (@benshapiro) July 14, 2020

Former “America’s Got Talent” host Nick Cannon praised infamous anti-Semitic faith-leader Louis Farrakhan as “honorable Minister Farrakhan” and went on a long racist rant during a 90-minute episode of the “Cannon’s Class” podcast charging white people with “lacking compassion.”
“The only way that they can act is evil,” Cannon said.
https://twitter.com/ZubyMusic/status/1283121203759198210?s=20
ViacomCBS terminated its relationship with an unrepentant Cannon following the remarks.

INBOX: ViacomCBS terminates relationship with Nick Cannon after he refuses to apologize or acknowledge wrongdoing by spreading blatantly anti-Semitic conspiracy theories pic.twitter.com/BD94qu5jws
— Peter J. Hasson (@peterjhasson) July 15, 2020

Protestors gathered at the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill to demand the school change its mascot name from the “tar heels” crying a connection to the Confederacy.
William Thorpe, a 52-year-old alumni activist leading the campaign to rename university athletic teams said the phrase was re-appropriated during the Civil War to describe the commitment of southern soldiers fighting the Union patriots.
“They stood their ground as if they had tar on their heels,” Thorpe told The News & Observer. “If you call yourself a Tar Heel … you’re cheering for the essence of white supremacy.”
The National Basketball Association is banning customers from making custom jerseys to read “FreeHongKong” while allowing patrons to write ‘Burn Jews’ and ‘KillCops.’

The @NBA won't sell custom jerseys that say "FreeHongKong," but the NBA will create custom jerseys that say "FuckPolice" and "FuckHongKong."
The league makes billions from America, and still bows to China without a second though. Disgusting.
FULL STORY: https://t.co/KZOHWpAhwi pic.twitter.com/Tk9JD5Iqsz
— David Hookstead (@dhookstead) July 13, 2020

Hawaii Democratic Sen. Mazie Hirono charged Trump’s base with being built on foundation of white supremacists on MSNBC .

Sen. Mazie Hirono says “a lot of [Trump’s] base” is “white supremacists.”
What a despicable thing to say.
This contempt for and slandering of your fellow countrymen needs to stop. pic.twitter.com/vqxcp2scSL
— Vince Coglianese (@VinceCoglianese) July 13, 2020

USA Today issued a “fact-check” asserting the Trump campaign’s usage of an eagle, the nation’s national bird, was parroting Nazi propaganda from the first half of the 20th century.

The claim: Trump campaign shirts feature imperial eagle, a Nazi symbol
Our ruling: True https://t.co/3eCiYdgQvK
— USA TODAY (@USATODAY) July 12, 2020

Never mind that the eagle has been embedded in national emblems for more than 200 years. Because the Nazis adopted American symbolism, it must now be racist, unless it’s used by a Democrat.

USA Today is at it again… https://t.co/opR56K50mg pic.twitter.com/KBCKkoe8HN
— Julio Rosas (@Julio_Rosas11) July 12, 2020


Noticing a **minor** difference in the way @USATODAY portrays the symbolism of bald eagles here… pic.twitter.com/I4rbu31gMW
— Zach Parkinson (@AZachParkinson) July 12, 2020

Black Lives Matter activists demanding that state and local governments “defund police” are remaining silent over record crime sprees overtaking the nation’s cities leaving more black people dead.
Since June, Minneapolis, New York, Philadelphia, Nashville, Chicago, Milwaukee, Indianapolis, Cincinnati, and New Orleans have seen homicides jump 20 percent compared to last year.
“We’re protesting for months, for weeks, saying “black lives matter,'” said John Ayala, who lost his 11-year-old grandson in a Washington D.C. shooting. “Black lives matter, it seems like, only when a police officer shoots a black person. What about all the black-on-black crime that’s happening in the community?”
Penn State deleted a tweet reading, “Dear conservative students, your viewpoints are important” after left-wing students found the statement offensive.
“[Conservative students] are the students that call us the N-word and show us first-hand what white supremacy is,” one student wrote in the school newspaper.

Penn State Liberal Arts just deleted this tweet. It is problematic on MANY levels and the swift negative response was utterly predictable. pic.twitter.com/3HN7ZnhxrA
— Lindsay McKenzie (@lindsay_mck) June 12, 2020

Seattle’s Office of Civil Rights held a segregated employee training session for white workers in June focused on ways to “undo their whiteness.”
The purpose behind the workshop titled, “Interrupting Internalized Racial Superiority and Whiteness” was to teach white people about their “complicity in the system of white supremacy and interrupt racism in ways that are accountable to Black, Indigenous and People of Color.”
Minnesota Democratic Rep. Ilhan Omar called for the complete destruction of the nation’s economic and political systems.
“As long as our economy and political systems prioritize profit without considering who is profiting, who is being shut out, we will perpetuate this inequality,” Omar said. “We cannot stop at [the] criminal justice system. We must begin the work of dismantling the who system of oppression.”

Rep. Ilhan Omar calls for "dismantling" of the U.S. "economy and political systems," which she calls a "system of oppression." pic.twitter.com/AP072GsmzW
— Daily Caller (@DailyCaller) July 7, 2020

A new Townhall/Young Americas Foundation survey shows only 40 percent of college students reporting they are proud to be Americans. In contrast, 63 percent of high schoolers reported the same.
In a June New York City Education Committee Council meeting, white councilmember Rachel Broshi charged that “it hurts people when they see a white man bouncing a brown baby on their lap and they don’t know the context. That is harmful.”
https://twitter.com/pxlitic/status/1279306013657759744?s=20
A prominent statue of famed abolitionist Frederick Douglas was removed in early July following a vandalism incident on the anniversary of his Fourth of July Rochester speech.

A Frederick Douglas statue in Maplewood Park was removed from its base overnight. pic.twitter.com/J43hqxuHTT
— Atyia Collins (@Atyia_Collins) July 5, 2020

Illinois Democratic Sen. Tammy Duckworth said people need to keep an open mind when it comes to desecrating the memory of the nation’s most prominent founding father, George Washington.
“I think we should listen to the everybody. I think we should listen to the argument there,” Duckworth said on CNN.
https://twitter.com/GiancarloSopo/status/1279792314794283008?s=20
Duckworth also peddled a blatant lie about President Donald Trump’s Mount Rushmore address that the president honored “dead traitors.” Unless she’s calling the four men on top of the mountain traitors to the nation they led, or Frederick Douglas, and Martin Luther King, Trump did no such thing.

This a list of the men and women President @realDonaldTrump talked about in his speech at Mount Rushmore.
Senator, please do tell the nation, who among them do you consider a “dead traitor”? https://t.co/NfJJ3bw0tf pic.twitter.com/HxwJaWOMWB
— Giancarlo Sopo (@GiancarloSopo) July 5, 2020

In an attempt to discredit President Trump’s patriotic parlance at a pillar of American pride near the peak of Mount Rushmore, CNN’s political editor-at-large, Chris Cillizza went line-by-line of the address and titled his piece, “The 28 most outrageous lines from Donald Trump’s Mount Rushmore speech.”
Among the lines Cillizza took issue with, was of Trump pledging to protect the iconic monument.
“I am here as your President to proclaim before the country and before the world, this monument will never be desecrated,” Trump said.
“Uh, was there some sort of movement to tear down Mount Rushmore I was unaware of or…?”
In fact, monuments to the four presidents enshrined on the mountain have been desecrated or destroyed across the country, and 44 percent of self-identifying liberals have voiced support for blowing up the mountain, an idea seemingly embraced by the Democratic Party.

Haven’t seen this much gaslighting since Victorian-era London. pic.twitter.com/K48nGYhEJY
— Mark Hemingway (@Heminator) July 4, 2020

President Trump’s unapologetically patriotic speech delivered at the base of Mount Rushmore on the eve of Independence Day drew the ire of legacy media publishing left-wing opinion pieces covering the address and advertising them as straight news.
“President Trump delivered a dark and divisive speech at Mount Rushmore, leaning into the culture wars and barely mentioning the pandemic,” the New York Times pushed out in a breaking news update moments after the prime time address.
The usual culprits joined the dishonest fray featuring the Washington Post charging Trump with exploiting social divisions and ABC News doing the same.

At Mount Rushmore, Trump exploits social divisions, warns of ‘left-wing cultural revolution’ in dark speech ahead of Independence Day. https://t.co/kXEOf8tcnI
— The Washington Post (@washingtonpost) July 4, 2020


Pres. Donald Trump pushes racial division, flouts virus rules at the foot of Mount Rushmore. https://t.co/xMXv7fLaXN
— ABC News (@ABC) July 4, 2020

Boeing’s now former Communications Chief Niel Golightly was cancelled in July and resigned after an employee filed a complaint over a 1987 article opposing women serving in military combat.
“My article was a 29-year-old Cold War navy pilot’s misguided contribution to a debate that was live at the time,” said Golightly in a statement. “The dialogues that followed its publication 33 years ago quickly opened my eyes, indelibly changed my mind, and shaped the principles of fairness, inclusion, respect, and diversity that have guided my professional life since.”
A recent Harvard graduate, Claira Janover, is taking a bold stand against racism threatening to “stab” the next person she hears who dare says “All Lives Matter” in a viral TikTok video.

Watch this Harvard Snr threaten to stab people for saying ‘All Lives Matter.” https://t.co/r7Zn2SXxlb
— DrJaymz (@dr_jaymz1) July 1, 2020

Columbus, Ohio removed a statue of its namesake explorer Christopher Columbus on July 1 as the community succumbs to a woke reckoning on race, condemning the very leader it memorializes as a genocidal European imperialist.

A Columbus statue is removed in Columbus, Ohiopic.twitter.com/Mi4dgMovGU
— Alfons López Tena (@alfonslopeztena) July 1, 2020

If one had any doubt, the Democratic Party’s endorsement of the idea that celebrating America is akin to glorifying white supremacy proves extremism has gone mainstream.
In a quickly deleted tweet in the week leading up to the Fourth of July, the Democratic Party said President Donald Trump’s plan to attend a fireworks show at Mount Rushmore to celebrate American independence was “glorifying white supremacy.”
Washington Post global opinions editor Karen Attiah charged in a since-deleted tweet that “white women are lucky that we are just calling them ‘Karen’s’. And not calling for revenge.”
A new Quillette survey released in June reveals 70 percent of self-identifying “liberals” want a complete rewrite of the U.S. Constitution “to a new Americans constitution that better reflects our diversity as a people.”
The same survey found overwhelming majorities, 76 percent of “liberals” and 81 percent of those who identified as “very liberal,” want to “rebalance the art shown in museums across the country until an analysis of content shows that it reflects the demography of the population and perspective of Native people and citizens of color.”
Black Lives Matter Global Network co-founder Patrisse Cullors appeared to violate IRS laws in June when revealing on CNN that the movement’s primary goal is to oust President Donald Trump this November.
“While we’re also going to continue to push and pressure Vice President Joe Biden around his policies and relationship to policing and criminalization, that’s going to be important. But our goal is to get Trump out now,” Cullors said.
Organizations such as the Black Lives Matter Global Network, which is sponsored by a 501(c)(3), are prohibited from conducting campaign activity, according to the IRS.

President "Trump not only needs to not be in office in November but he should resign now," says co-founder of the Black Lives Matter Global Network Patrisse Cullors. "Trump needs to be out of office. He is not fit for office." pic.twitter.com/T6mLZ11cEv
— The Lead CNN (@TheLeadCNN) June 19, 2020

The New York Times’ Nikole Hannah-Jones, the lead essayist of the paper’s ahistorical “1619 Project” who appears several times throughout this list, wrote a racist rant in 1995 for Notre Dame’s The Observer that “the white race is the biggest murderer, rapist, pillager, and thief in the modern world.”
Hannah-Jones also characterized Christopher Columbus and the early European explorers as “barbaric devils” who were “no different” from Adolf Hitler.
Freshman New York Democratic Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez claimed in a June interview that “Latinos are black,” during a discussion on racism.

.@AOC: “Latinos are black … We have to have conversations around ‘colorism,’ and we have to have conversations around the African and indigenous roots from which we come and how that’s reflected in systems of power.” pic.twitter.com/ki1lDDNhKS
— Tom Elliott (@tomselliott) June 22, 2020

Prominent Black Lives Matter activist Sean King is declaring statues of Jesus as “a form of white supremacy.”
https://twitter.com/shaunking/status/1275106946916499456?s=20
New York City’s Museum of Natural History declared on June 21 it would be removing its statue of President Theodore Roosevelt because it stands as a symbol of racist colonialism.
As this list will outline, Roosevelt’s coming removal marks the completion of the mob now having targets all four presidents whose faces are enshrined on the face of Mount Rushmore.
There will be a protest against the museum’s decision at noon on June 28 led by The Federalist’s New York Correspondent David Marcus.

Sunday June 28th. Noon. Please join concerned citizens to protest the removal of this statue of Theodore Roosevelt at the Museum of Natural History. The madness has to stop. pic.twitter.com/JfW2Z6MdXk
— David Marcus (@BlueBoxDave) June 22, 2020

NPR, which is funded by taxpayers, invented violence out of thin air from a “right-wing extremist” who narrowly escaped a viscous assault from rioters who blocked her car, ripped out her dreadlocks and pointed a gun at her.

NPR vs reality (HT @TimRunsHisMouth) https://t.co/TX2dHExR1E pic.twitter.com/0TPUfCRLAg
— Stephen L. Miller (@redsteeze) June 21, 2020

The New York Times writer behind the legacy paper’s anti-American “1619 Project” to rewrite the nation’s past said she would it was “an honor” for the current period of civil unrest be deemed the “1619 Riots” that have destroyed minority businesses and brought the destruction of law and order.
https://twitter.com/nhannahjones/status/1274351225492967424?s=20
The ice cream maker announced on June 19 it would be renaming its 99-year-old brand because they now “recognize the term is derogatory.”

If this doesn’t end racism, nothing will. https://t.co/AxSOI5moSO
— Titania McGrath (@TitaniaMcGrath) June 21, 2020

Protesters in Portland, Oregon toppled a statue of George Washington and lit an American flag draped over the disgraced monument to the nation’s first president on fire.

Protesters in northeast Portland have pulled down a statue of George Washington pic.twitter.com/5tOzAVbUp5
— Mike Baker (@ByMikeBaker) June 19, 2020

George Washington was also the target of vandals in Chicago.
https://twitter.com/Breaking911/status/1272215391046164481?s=20
Twitter issued a “fact-check” of an obviously fake video shared by President Donald Trump that was a parody of CNN’s coverage of the recent unrest gripping the country over race.
About 24 hours later, Twitter and Facebook took down the video over a copyright complaint.
https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1273770669214490626?s=20
CNN headlined a piece over South Carolina Republican Sen. Tim Scott’s reaction to his legislation on police reform being vilified as a “token, half-hearted approach,” by Illinois Democratic Sen. Dick Durbin with “See black senator’s emotional response…”
CNN later changed the headline to read “See Tim Scott’s emotional response after his bill was called ‘token,'” and Durbin apologized for the offensive remark.

He’s got a name. It’s United States Senator Tim Scott, @CNN. 
Use it. https://t.co/qujlMsAV6v
— Ken Farnaso (@KLF) June 19, 2020

No comment.
https://twitter.com/jason_howerton/status/1273637654328999938?s=20
The stepmother of the former Atlanta police officer who was charged in the fatal shooting of Rayshard Brooks was fired after her stepson’s termination from the police force.
A “source familiar with the matter” told Fox News’ Tucker Carlson that Melissa Rolfe was let go from her job in human resources at the Atlanta-based firm Equity Prime Mortgage where “her only crime was being Officer Rolfe’s stepmother.”

Here’s the segment where Tucker Carlson revealed the stepmother of the ex-Atlanta officer’s firing: pic.twitter.com/CkOj0hTTmb
— Emily Brooks (@emilybrooksnews) June 19, 2020

NBC News tried to strip The Federalist of its Google ad revenue by working with a left-wing British think tank to complain to the tech giant about Federalist reporting.
NBC’s “Verification Unit” collaborated with the United Kingdom’s “Center for Countering Digital Hate” to compile a report complaining about The Federalist exposing the mainstream media’s deliberate lying over recent protesting that has gripped the nation without citing the stories in question.
Google released a statement however, debunking NBC’s reporting that The Federalist had already been demonetized, clarifying that the Silicone Valley tech giant is still threatening to introduce sanctions on the website over third-party content in its comment sections.
Former UK member of Parliament, Fiona Onasanya took a courageous stand against Kellogg’s cereal on Twitter attacking its mascots representing Rice Krispies for being “three white boys.”
The charge prompted pushback on Twitter, with some tweeting back “Elves Lives Matter” to stand up for Snap, Crackle, and Pop.

@KelloggsUK, as you are yet to reply to my email – Coco Pops and Rice Krispies have the same compòsition (except for the fact CP's are brown and chocolate flavoured)… so I was wondering why Rice Krispies have three white boys representing the brand and Coco Pops have a monkey?
— Fiona Onasanya (@Fiona_Onasanya) June 15, 2020

Eight years ago, Dominos Pizza thanked now-White House Press Secretary Kaleigh McEnany for issuing the nationwide pizza chain a compliment.

@kayleighmcenany That's one heck of a compliment! Thanks for the love! #WEAPPRECIATEIT!
— Domino's Pizza (@dominos) November 9, 2012

According to NeverTrumpers infected with a severe case of Trump Derangement Syndrome however, that’s enough to destroy the brand of any food service nearly a decade later.
“You just killed your brand,” Wilson wrote on Twitter.
“Welp. It’s unfortunate that thanking a customer for a compliment back in 2012 would be viewed as political. Guess that’s 2020 for ya,” Dominos wrote back.

Welp. It's unfortunate that thanking a customer for a compliment back in 2012 would be viewed as political. Guess that's 2020 for ya.
— Domino's Pizza (@dominos) June 16, 2020

Oklahoma State football coach Mike Gundy faced a player mutiny simply wearing a t-shirt sporting the logo of One America News (OAN) Network.
https://twitter.com/Kyle__Boone/status/1272553163766317061
After player Chuba Hubbard, the nation’s leading rusher last fall and a top prospect for the National Football League (NFL) publicly complained about the t-shirt with the support teammates and administrators including the university president, Gundy issued an apology and promised “changes” to the team culture.
The Minneapolis City Council moved through on its promise to abolish its police department by a unanimous vote on June 12 to replace its law enforcement with a “transformative new model.”
The resolution passed declared the city government would begin a year long process to develop its new system of providing public safety.
The New York Times ran an op-ed on June 12 erasing any doubt that calls to “defund the police” actually mean the complete abolition of law enforcement, as if the Minneapolis City Council’s Friday vote to do just that wasn’t proof already.
As this list will later explain, the Times had previously issued an apology to readers for publishing a well-reasoned editorial by Arkansas Republican Sen. Tom Cotton arguing for Trump to “send in the troops” to quell violent riots after staff complained its publication put black employees “in danger.”

Running this column puts lives in danger. pic.twitter.com/SkESdnYpX2
— Tom Cotton (@TomCottonAR) June 13, 2020

Seattle Mayor Jenny Durkan shot back at President Donald Trump on June 12 as the president called for an end to the city’s partial occupation by socialist protesters.
“Seattle is fine,” Durkan wrote, defending the demonstrators keeping downtown businesses that have survived the pandemic closed as heroic exemplars of free expression. “Don’t be so afraid of democracy.”

Seattle is fine. Don’t be so afraid of democracy. https://t.co/o26PkJnYhA
— Mayor Jenny Durkan (@MayorJenny) June 12, 2020

“The Good Place” actress Kristen Bell is being accused online of glorifying color blindness in her new children’s book titled, “The World Needs More Purple People.”
One Twitter user mocked it as the “‘I don’t see colour,’ book.”
https://twitter.com/getcerebral/status/1271480339014221824?s=20
Bell was one of a handful of celebrities that participated in a Hollywood’s “I take responsibility” video apologizing for their whiteness.
https://twitter.com/_juliannemoore/status/1271093436872101888?s=20
An online petition has now reached more than 5,000 signatures to remove a statue of Mahatma Ghandi in Leicester because the tribute to the Indian peace figure was a “fascist, racist, and sexual predator,” according to activists.
Jessica Mulroney was fired from her television gigs with ABC News’ “Good Morning America” and CTV for “I DO REDO” after athlete-turned-influencer Sasha Exeter condemned Mulroney’s recent call to action from white allies on behalf of Black Lives Matter too “generic” and therefore offensive.
Mulroney’s employer’s agreed. While ABC didn’t say what led to Mulroney’s departure, CTV released a statement.
“Because of recent conduct by one of our show’s hosts, Jessica Mulroney conflicts with our commitment to diversity and equality, CTV has removed ‘I DO REDO’ from all Bell Media channels and platforms effective immediately.”

A statement from CTV regarding @jessicamulroney pic.twitter.com/gDzmob51oa
— CTV PR (@CTV_PR) June 11, 2020

“We are deeply sorry for the hurt this has caused,” the group said in a statement, according to Rolling Stone.
The country music trio will now go by “Lady A.”

Lady Antebellum have changed their name to "Lady A" and issued a statement apologizing for any hurt their original name may have caused https://t.co/xTexQE175p pic.twitter.com/7RbGkPgzkG
— Rolling Stone (@RollingStone) June 11, 2020

The British television station, UKTV pulled down the episode “The German” of “Fawlty Towers” off air over “racial slurs.”
“The episode contains racial slurs so we are taking the episode down while we review it,” UKTV said in a statement.
John Cleese from the show condemned the move as “cowardly and gutless and contemptable.” On the comments the station found offensive, Cleese made clear, “we are not supporting his views, we are making fun of them. If they can’t see that, if people are too stupid to see that, what can one say?”
As animosity towards police reach new heights, popular television shows depicting law enforcement doing their jobs are getting ripped from the air. Paramount Network’s “Cops” was among the first to go, followed by “Live PD” the next day produced by A&E with MGM’s Big Fish Entertainment.
The protests have reached Adventure Bay, a fictional Nickelodeon town home to the children’s show “Paw Patrol,” celebrating good cops which is now being demonized as “copapaganda.”
“Euthanize the police dog,” demanded police brutality protesters online, according to the New York Times.
University of California Los Angeles Accounting Professor Gordon Klein was placed on three weeks of involuntary leave after students demanded his firing for rejecting requests to provide a “no harm” final for black students.
Klein was condemned as a “racist” and was put in police protection following his refusal to give into students’ discriminatory demands.
The occupiers of a section of downtown Seattle branding it the “Capitol Hill Autonomous Zone,” released their list of demands that includes the total abolition of police replaced by a new socialist utopis complete with a 21st century era segregation.
Read their list of demands here.
Washington Democratic Gov. Jay Inslee was completely oblivious to the anarchist insurrection taking over Seattle when he was asked about the rogue militia during a coronavirus press briefing.

Jay Inslee had no idea anarchists were overrunning his state’s largest city. 
“That’s news to me,” he said when asked about #CapitalHillAutonomousZonepic.twitter.com/cDwqzEZq6b
— Tristan Justice (@JusticeTristan) June 11, 2020

HBO also announced on June 9 it would rip the 1939 classic “Gone with the Wind” from its library because it’s racist. Never mind that Hattie McDaniel was the first black actress to capture an Academy Award for her role in the film.
By the next day however, the movie re-emerged as a #1 Amazon best-seller.
Thirty poets are demanding the resignation of the Poetry Foundation president along with the board after the group issued the following statement:
The Poetry Foundation and Poetry magazine stand in solidarity with the Black community, and denounce injustice and systemic racism.
As an organization we recognize that there is much work to be done, and we are committed to engaging in this work to eradicate institutional racism. We acknowledge that real change takes time and dedication, and we are committed to making this a priority.
Per usual, it’s not enough. Not even close. What would be?
Minneapolis City Council President Lisa Bender told residents on June 8 worried that the absence of law enforcement in their city they ought simply check their “privilege.”

CAMEROTA: "What if in the middle of the night my home is broken into. Who do I call?"
BENDER: "Yes, I hear that loud and clear from a lot of my neighbors. And I know — and myself, too, and I know that that comes from a place of privilege." pic.twitter.com/WhubQ9yJIf
— Eddie Zipperer (@EddieZipperer) June 8, 2020

The comments came a day after the city council declared a veto-proof majority to completely dismantle its police.
The New York Times apologized and ousted an editorial editor in June following the publications of a well-reasoned op-ed from a sitting U.S. senator and combat veteran advocating the use of the military to quell the violent rioting that engulfed the nation.
James Bennet, the Times editor responsible for the decision to publish the piece from Sen. Cotton resigned while another Times employee who helped edit the piece was reassigned following internal outrage made public when colleagues collectively tweeted: “Running this puts Black @nytimes staffers in danger.”
Democratic Minneapolis Mayor Jacob Frey was kicked out of a protest in a walk of shame on June 6 even after professing his “coming to grips with” his “own brokenness” for the sin of being white standing in the center of thousands of protesters.
His crime? That he refused to promise his support for the complete abolition of the city’s police department.
“I do not support the full abolition of police,” Frey said when presented with the yes or no ultimatum.
The next day, the Minneapolis City Council announced its move to banish its police department.
NFL Quarterback Drew Brees sparked nationwide outrage when saying in a Yahoo Finance interview that he would “never agree with anybody disrespecting the flag of the United States of America or our country.”
Facing intense pressure from the sports world, Brees apologized, again, again, and again.
That’s a bit of a stretch, particularly considering Antifa defaced the World War II Memorial on the National Mall.

June 6, 1944. Largest ANTIFA operation in history. pic.twitter.com/TlpfsySKwr
— Matt Duss (@mattduss) June 6, 2020


Biggest antifa rally in history. https://t.co/ypa46PvYx1
— Mara Liasson (@MaraLiasson) June 6, 2020

It seems NPR has skipped right to the book-burning phase of the American woke revolution urging individuals to “decolonize” their bookshelves in an effort to rewrite the nation’s past.

In essence, "decolonizing your bookshelf" is about actively resisting and casting aside the colonialist ideas of narrative, storytelling, and literature that have pervaded the American psyche for so long, says @itsjuanlove. https://t.co/pbSBx8Z4So
— NPR (@NPR) June 6, 2020

A day after another round of D.C. rioting, a group of three women cleaning the side of a vandalized federal building were harassed by one activist calling their public service “disgusting.”
“So you don’t care about black lives then?”
https://twitter.com/PetiteNicoco/status/1268405744187191296?s=20
On June 1, dozens of public health experts signed an open letter blaming white supremacy on societal illnesses applauding the protesters for combating the true pandemic without regard for the novel Wuhan coronavirus that shut down the nation causing irreparable damage in the process.
“As public health advocates, we do not condemn these gatherings as risk for COVID-19 transmission… This should not be confused with a permissive stance on all gatherings, particularly protests against stay-home orders,” they wrote.
In other words, protests are fine as long as they remain in the name of social justice. Any other form of expression however, must be banned, for public health that is. Surely that’s a convincing message to the millions of Americans forced down to food pantries because the government deemed their life’s work as non-essential, or to the families unable to say goodbye to loved ones because funerals of more than 10 people were too dangerous.

So it turns out viruses are woke-sensitive. If you are protesting  against racism, you won’t get Covid-19 or spread it to others. However, If you are protesting the lockdown so you can work or open your business, you are a murderer who is selfishly spreading Covid. #science pic.twitter.com/0McBofRGtr
— Rachel Campos-Duffy (@RCamposDuffy) June 7, 2020

As millions of Americans flocked the nation’s city streets in righteous protests, the rest of the country has been forced to remain locked down despite its leaders joining in on the massive gatherings violating their own social distancing orders, but the media doesn’t seem to care.
In fact, the double standard is even encouraged, where reporters cry danger over sitting next to one another for a White House press briefing after celebrating their own presence amidst a sea of social justice warriors.

It truly is incredible. pic.twitter.com/B9mt2sMmrK
— Tristan Justice (@JusticeTristan) June 5, 2020

If nothing else is clear in the aftermath of these time-defining protests, it’s surely time to end the lockdowns.

Historic St. John's Church,  near the White House, is on fire.
The church was built in 1816. Starting with James Madison, every president has attended services at St. James. pic.twitter.com/3gCBGyyx51
— Washington Examiner (@dcexaminer) June 1, 2020

White people are now bowing down in religious gatherings to atone for ancestral sins.

Protesters in Bethesda attend a woke sermon to cry about their white guilt. Note that not a single one of them is social distancing. Two weeks ago, the media would've called them terrorists. https://t.co/rOJCsmPs9v
— Ian Miles Cheong @ stillgray.substack.com (@stillgray) June 2, 2020

https://twitter.com/Shaggie_Tweets/status/1267273066461007872?s=20
The Atlantic writer who headlined a piece on Georgia’s pandemic reopening, “Georgia’s Experiment in Human Sacrifice” called riot curfews insane.
“I’m sorry but 8 p.m. is an absolutely insane curfew for a city in which much of the population famously does not even eat dinner until like 9,” Amanda Mull wrote on Twitter.
Grant Napear resigned as the Sacramento Kings TV play-by-play announcer and was fired from his radio job for daring to utter the phrase “all lives matter,” which includes black lives by the way.
Craig Gore, a writer and producer was fired from the program for sharing a post on Facebook featuring himself armed at his front-door promising to protect his home from rioters just two blocks away.
Government-funded PBS Reporter Yamiche Alcindor tried (and failed) to fact-check President Donald Trump on the presence of “anarchists” among the nationwide protests.

“These people are anarchists,” President Trump says without providing any evidence. https://t.co/P7HGwsbKWD
— Yamiche Alcindor (@Yamiche) May 31, 2020

Meanwhile, NBC News allegedly directed its reporters at one point not to use the term “riot” to describe the spontaneous combustion of buildings, and just as a warlord was in the process of taking over Seattle, CNN’s Brian Stelter dedicated an entire newsletter to “the riot lie.”
Make no mistake, the list of reporters downplaying the violence is virtually endless, but this video just about sums it up:

"This mostly a protest. It is not, generally speaking, unruly.
But fires have been started."
MSNBC reporter says protests in Minneapolis are not "generally speaking, unruly" as buildings burn in the background. pic.twitter.com/IzzEmKgxhM
— Washington Examiner (@dcexaminer) May 29, 2020

The New York Times’ architect of the anti-American “1619 Project” Nikole Hannah-Jones decided to just say it out lout, explicitly rejecting the idea that destroying property fits the definition of “violence.”
“Destroying property, which can be replaced, is not violence,” Hannah-Jones said on CBS, to which the anchors offered no challenge.
“It’s a great point that you make Nikole,” responded CBS’ Vladimir Duthiers.
Hannah-Jones also erroneously claimed the Second Amendment is racist despite its most ardent supporters having been fervently opposed to slavery.
In the wake of the Minneapolis riots, Hollywood celebrities staying true to form pledged donations to pay the bail for those arrested in the chaos. Among them include Seth Rogan, Steve Carell, Cynthia Nixon and the Sadfie Brothers.
CNN’s Chris Cuomo showcased is own ignorance of the First Amendment in early June appearing dumbfounded by the criticism that what the rioters were doing was actually wrong.
“Please, show me where it says protesters are supposed to be police and peaceful,” Cuomo said.
Here’s the text from the First Amendment, emphasis ours:
Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.

CNN's Chris Cuomo: "Please, show me where it says protesters are supposed to be polite and peaceful."
As riots and looting have broken out in cities across the country, this is the message the brother of New York governor Andrew Cuomo shares at the top of his show. pic.twitter.com/ZZ47zpyVlx
— Steve Guest (@SteveGuest) June 3, 2020

In an ironic twist, civil rights heroes have become the target of protester fury in the name of social justice. Monuments paying tribute to President Abraham Lincoln, an iconic abolitionist, and a union war hero have fallen victim to the demise of the demonstrators’ historical ignorance.

The Lincoln Memorial… THE ONE GUY WHOM THEY CAN THANK FOR NOT BEING SLAVES ANYMORE. pic.twitter.com/aAQ0bzIysa
— Asalieri (@TellahAsa) June 8, 2020


Admiral Farragut led the Union fleet at the Battle of Mobile Bay. Farragut's home state of Tennessee seceded, but he remained loyal to the Union. He fought to save his country from destruction and ensured that Americans held in bondage would live free. https://t.co/kPh4Pyf9qy
— Jarrett Stepman (@JarrettStepman) June 1, 2020

https://twitter.com/LiamSD12/status/1270993353685991425?s=20
During protests in Washington D.C., demonstrators defaced a monument to those who actually liberated the world from tyranny.

Cleaning graffiti off of the World War II Monument, just 6 days after Memorial Day. pic.twitter.com/NavghZePVk
— Bryce Klehm (@BryceKlehm) May 31, 2020

His life mattered too.

David Dorn was 77. He spent four decades protecting people as a police officer in St Louis and then came out of retirement to keep serving as Moline Acres' police chief.
Looters shot him in the torso & he died bleeding on a sidewalk
This chaos must endhttps://t.co/taCubEsFEU pic.twitter.com/98dOYChn8q
— Nate Madden (@NateOnTheHill) June 2, 2020

The worst of the rioting might be over (hopefully), but the destruction left behind will take years to rebuild. While violent protesters terrorized communities, minority neighborhoods reported bearing the brunt of the damage. Such progress for the advancement of the “oppressed.”