Title: Still No Consequences From Philadelphia Eagles For DeSean Jackson’s Anti-Jew Posts

Spotlight: ‘Because the white Jews knows that the Negroes are the real Children of Israel and to keep Americas secret the [white Jews] will blackmail America,’ wrote Philadelphia Eagles wide receiver DeSean Jackson.

Content Text:
Philadelphia Eagles wide receiver DeSean Jackson posted an Instagram story Monday using antisemitic quotes attributed to Adolf Hitler. 
“Because the white Jews knows that the Negroes are the real Children of Israel and to keep Americas secret the [white Jews] will blackmail America,” Jackson wrote. “[They] will extort America, their plan for world domination won’t work if the Negroes know who they were…The white citizens of America will be terrified to know that all this time they’ve been mistreating and discriminating and lynching the Children  of Israel.”

DeSean Jackson has been promoting anti-Semite Louis Farrakhan on his Instagram page. 
He hasen't trended for even second today. 
Wtf @Eagles @nflcommish @NFL pic.twitter.com/HMw4tzRhj1
— Greg Price (@greg_price11) July 7, 2020

In another post on his Instagram story Monday, Jackson, who holds the NFL record for the most career touchdowns of 60 or more yards, shared a clip of Melinda Gates talking about a coronavirus vaccine. “Farrakhan Warns Against Vaccine” he wrote, adding, “Disgusting a** [people] !! You get the vaccination first.. dumb broad !!”
DeSean was referring to the racist Nation of Islam leader Louis Farrakhan, who has a long history of using anti-Jewish slurs. DeSean’s Instagram stories were among two more admiring Instagram posts about Farrakhan, one on Monday night and another on Saturday.
One post, featuring a picture of Farrakhan preaching, was accompanied by a caption that read, “#farrakhan this man powerful I hope everyone got a chance to watch this!! Don’t be blinded. Know what’s going on!!” 
In his second post, a picture of Farrakhan was titled, “Farrakhan speaks out about the burden on earth” with a caption saying, “There must be 100% change… there’s a burden the earth is carrying that it must be relieved from. The earth is burdened by the wicked living on a planet that was made for the righteous.” 
After receiving criticism on social media, Jackson responded, “Anyone who feels I have hate towards the Jewish community took my post the wrong way.” 
He highlighted a passage from one of his original quotes attributed to Hitler that read, “[They] will extort America, their plan for world domination won’t work if the Negroes know who they were.” Jackson continued, “I have no hatred in my heart toward no one!! Equality. Equality [raised fist emojis].”
The Eagles issued a statement Tuesday saying they have spoken with Jackson about his antisemitic posts, conceding that, “regardless of his intentions, the messages he shared were offensive, harmful, and absolutely appalling.” They stated they had, “reiterated to DeSean the importance of not only apologizing, but also using his platform to take action to promote unity, equality, and respect.” 
The company did not say whether DeSean’s actions would result in any sort of sanction such as a suspension. Its statement only said, “We are continuing to evaluate the circumstances and will take appropriate action.” The Eagles said they are “committed to continuing to have productive and meaningful conversations with DeSean, as well as all of our players and staff, in order to educate, learn, and grow.” 
This year, the NFL committed $250 million over a 10-year period to combat “systemic racism.” One Twitter user wondered whether Jackson would receive the cancel culture treatment Drew Brees, the quarterback for the New Orleans Saints received for saying he would “never agree with anybody disrespecting the flag of the United States of America.” Shortly after publicly supporting America, Brees backtracked and apologized for his patriotism after backlash from an online mob, conflating support for his country with racism.
“DeSean Jackson pushed Farrakhan’s anti-Semitic and anti-vaccination comments on his Instagram page today. We’ll see if he’s forced to address it. Drew Brees was forced to repeatedly apologize for defending the American flag. via@peterjhasson”

DeSean Jackson pushed Farrakhan's anti-Semitic and anti-vaccination comments on his Instagram page today. 
We'll see if he's forced to address it. Drew Brees was forced to repeatedly apologize for defending the American flag. via @peterjhasson https://t.co/x4Mwod9CHK
— Chuck Ross (@ChuckRossDC) July 7, 2020
