Title: ***Live Updates*** Trump Delivers State of Union Address

Spotlight: President Donald Trump will deliver his State of the Union address on Tuesday evening, a day before the Senate holds its acquittal vote on the articles of impeachment. Michigan Governor Gretchen Whitmer will give the Democrats’ response, and Rep. Veronica Escobar (D-TX) will deliver the Democrats’ response in Spanish. Numerous Democrats like Reps. Al Green (D-TX), Ayanna Pressley (D-MA), Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D-NY), and Maxine Waters (D-CA) will boycott the address.

Content Text:
Stay tuned to Breitbart News for live updates. All times eastern.
—
12:01 AM:
Classless Nancy Pelosi ripped up a speech that said: 
"We achieved record and permanent funding for our Nation’s Historically Black Colleges and Universities."#SOTU pic.twitter.com/PdKlGN9xx6
— Team Trump (#SOTU2020) (@TeamTrump) February 5, 2020
11:59 PM: Biden rips Trump for giving Rush Medal of Freedom: “He even awarded our nation’s highest civilian honor, not to the real American hero in the gallery — one of the last surviving Tuskegee Airmen—but a conservative media personality who has done as much as Trump himself to divide our nation…”
.@JoeBiden response to #SOTU: “In one fell swoop, Trump delivered a speech worthy of the worst demagogue and turned his constitutional obligation to inform Congress about the state of our union into an episode of reality television.” pic.twitter.com/ZEXwHiEzK4
— Andrew Bates (@AndrewBatesNC) February 5, 2020
 
 
 
11:40 PM: Politics editor at The Root upset at “these black folks allowing themselves to be exploited by this administration.”
These black folks allowing themselves to be exploited by this administration, that has consistently encouraged and coddled white nationalists, should be ashamed. #SOTU
— Jason Johnson (@DrJasonJohnson) February 5, 2020
11:27 PM: On Instagram, Ocasio-Cortez says Trump cares about socialism but doesn’t seem to care about introducing “fascism.” She rips Rush for being a “racist” and mocks him for pretending to be surprised. Says it is “nauseating” that Rush got a Medal of Freedom. She says Trump cheapened Rush’s Medal of Freedom by not even giving him a formal ceremony at the White House. She says Trump treated the State of the Union like a game show and handed out “prizes” to minorities. She accuses Trump of “handing out cash” to black people at rallies.
11:25 PM: Bernie whacks Trump on pre-existing conditions:
Trump said, "We will always protect patients with pre-existing conditions.”
Really?
This is the same president who came one vote away from throwing 32 million Americans off the health care they have and ending the Affordable Care Act’s protection for pre-existing conditions.
— Bernie Sanders (@BernieSanders) February 5, 2020
11:20 PM: Dems a bit worried tonight.
I agree with @VanJones68 right now. Democrats need to focus on black and Latino voters. Trump made a deliberate play for them. 
I am critical of Dems putting everything in for the regular "Rust Belt" voter. If they don't energize all of us, they ain't gonna win. #SOTU
— Wajahat Ali (@WajahatAli) February 5, 2020
11:15 PM: Pelosi:
Democrats will never stop extending the hand of friendship to get the job done #ForThePeople. We will work to find common ground where we can, but will stand our ground where we cannot. #SOTU pic.twitter.com/ELJqR9q4xD
— Nancy Pelosi (@SpeakerPelosi) February 5, 2020
10:32 PM: Michigan Gov. Whitmer delivers her response from the school her daughters attend. She says she needs more than 10 minutes to respond to Trump’s speech and his divisiveness. She is ripping Trump and the Republicans for “bullying people on Twitter” and failing to deliver on infrastructure. She says Trump burns bridges on Twitter instead of building bridges. She talks about Democrats fixing roads and pipes and the “sandwich generation.” Whitmer takes on Trump for claiming the economy is booming, asking “for whom?” … She details local pieces of legislation Dem. Governors are working on before claiming Democrats are the ones who actually fight for hardworking Americans.
“Michigan invented the middle class,” she says. “So, we know–if the economy doesn’t work for working people, it just doesn’t work.”
Michigander Tlaib walked out of SOTU speech.
I walked out of that speech. The lies, the bigotry, and the shameless bragging about taking away food stamps that people depend on to live—it was all beneath the dignity of the office he occupies. Shame on this forever impeached president.
— Rashida Tlaib (@RashidaTlaib) February 5, 2020
10:26 PM: PELOSI RIPS SPEECH IN HALF:
.@SpeakerPelosi tears up of State of the Union speech.#SOTU #SOTU2020 pic.twitter.com/sIpi4G7KsL
— CSPAN (@cspan) February 5, 2020
THAT’S MY SPEAKER!!!#SOTU
— Rep. Veronica Escobar (@RepEscobar) February 5, 2020
Q: Why did you tear up the speech?
PELOSI: “Because it was the courteous thing to do.”
PELOSI: “It was the courteous thing to do considering the alternative.”
— Frank Thorp V (@frankthorp) February 5, 2020
Speaker Pelosi just ripped up:
One of our last surviving Tuskegee Airmen.
The survival of a child born at 21 weeks.
The mourning families of Rocky Jones and Kayla Mueller.
A service member's reunion with his family.
That's her legacy.
— The White House (@WhiteHouse) February 5, 2020
10:25 PM: Trump’s conclusion on America being a land of heroes and pioneers:
As the world bears witness tonight, America is a land of heroes. This is the place where greatness is born, where destinies are forged, and where legends come to life. This is the home of Thomas Edison and Teddy Roosevelt, of many great Generals, including Washington, Pershing, Patton, and MacArthur. This is the home of Abraham Lincoln, Frederick Douglass, Amelia Earhart, Harriet Tubman, the Wright Brothers, Neil Armstrong, and so many more. This is the country where children learn names like Wyatt Earp, Davy Crockett, and Annie Oakley. This is the place where the pilgrims landed at Plymouth and where Texas patriots made their last stand at the Alamo.
The American Nation was carved out of the vast frontier by the toughest, strongest, fiercest, and most determined men and women ever to walk the face of the Earth. Our ancestors braved the unknown; tamed the wilderness; settled the Wild West; lifted millions from poverty, disease, and hunger; vanquished tyranny and fascism; ushered the world to new heights of science and medicine; laid down the railroads, dug out canals, raised up the skyscrapers — and, ladies and gentlemen, our ancestors built the most exceptional Republic ever to exist in all of human history. And we are making it greater than ever before!
This is our glorious and magnificent inheritance.
We are Americans. We are the pioneers. We are the pathfinders. We settled the new world, we built the modern world, and we changed history forever by embracing the eternal truth that everyone is made equal by the hand of Almighty God.
America is the place where anything can happen! America is the place where anyone can rise. And here, on this land, on this soil, on this continent, the most incredible dreams come true!
This Nation is our canvas, and this country is our masterpiece. We look at tomorrow and see unlimited frontiers just waiting to be explored. Our brightest discoveries are not yet known. Our most thrilling stories are not yet told. Our grandest journeys are not yet made. The American Age, the American Epic, the American Adventure, has only just begun!
Our spirit is still young; the sun is still rising; God’s grace is still shining; and my fellow Americans, the best is yet to come!
Thank you. God Bless You. God Bless America.
10:20 PM: Trump surprises Amy Williams and her kids from Fort Bragg with her husband Sergeant First Class Townsend Williams, who was on his fourth deployment to Afghanistan, to “USA! USA!” chants.
“Amy, your family’s sacrifice makes it possible for all of our families to live in safety and peace,” Trump says. “We thank you.”
10:11 PM: Trump says his administration is combating radical Islamic terrorism and speaks about his Israel-Palestine peace plan. He also says the bloodthirsty leader of ISIS, al-Baghdadi, is dead. Trump introduces the parents of Kayla Mueller and Kelli Hake, whose husband, Army Staff Sergeant Christopher Hake, was killed by roadside bomb in Iraq.
Trump then speaks about Soleimani and Iran:
The terrorist responsible for killing Sergeant Hake was Qasem Soleimani, who provided the deadly roadside bomb that took Chris’s life. Soleimani was the Iranian Regime’s most ruthless butcher, a monster who murdered or wounded thousands of American service members in Iraq. As the world’s top terrorist, Soleimani orchestrated the deaths of countless men, women, and children. He directed the December assault on United States Forces in Iraq, and was actively planning new attacks. That is why, last month, at my direction, the United States Military executed a flawless precision strike that killed Soleimani and terminated his evil reign of terror forever.
Our message to the terrorists is clear: You will never escape American justice. If you attack our citizens, you forfeit your life!
In recent months, we have seen proud Iranians raise their voices against their oppressive rulers. The Iranian regime must abandon its pursuit of nuclear weapons, stop spreading terror, death, and destruction, and start working for the good of its own people. Because of our powerful sanctions, the Iranian economy is doing very poorly. We can help them make it very good in a short period of time, but perhaps they are too proud or too foolish to ask for that help. We are here. Let’s see which road they choose. It is totally up to them.
10:10 PM: Trump says so long as he is president, he will always protect the Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms.
Tim Ryan has had enough and walks out.
Rep. Tim Ryan: "I just walked out of the #StateOfTheUnion. I’ve had enough. It’s like watching professional wrestling. It’s all fake."
— NBC News (@NBCNews) February 5, 2020
10:08 PM: Trump on religious liberty:
My Administration is also defending religious liberty, and that includes the Constitutional right to pray in public schools. In America, we do not punish prayer. We do not tear down crosses. We do not ban symbols of faith. We do not muzzle preachers and pastors. In America, we celebrate faith. We cherish religion. We lift our voices in prayer, and we raise our sights to the Glory of God!
10:05 PM: Trump honors Chief Patrol Agent Raul Ortiz and says his administration wants merit-based immigration and an end to catch-and-release policies.
 
10:01 PM: Trump rips Sanctuary Cities and introduces Jody Jones, whose brother Rocky was murdered by an illegal immigrant in cold blood at a gas station:
Tragically, there are many cities in America where radical politicians have chosen to provide sanctuary for these criminal illegal aliens. In Sanctuary Cities, local officials order police to release dangerous criminal aliens to prey upon the public, instead of handing them over to ICE to be safely removed.
Just 29 days ago, a criminal alien freed by the Sanctuary City of New York was charged with the brutal rape and murder of a 92-year-old woman. The killer had been previously arrested for assault, but under New York’s sanctuary policies, he was set free. If the city had honored ICE’s detainer request, his victim would be alive today.
The State of California passed an outrageous law declaring their whole State to be a sanctuary for criminal illegal immigrants — with catastrophic results.
Here is just one tragic example. In December 2018, California police detained an illegal alien with five prior arrests, including convictions for robbery and assault. But as required by California’s Sanctuary Law, local authorities released him.
Trump asks Congress to “pass the Justice for Victims of Sanctuary Cities Act immediately. The United States of America should be a sanctuary for law-abiding Americans — not criminal aliens!”
9:58 PM: Trump now asking Congress to pass an infrastructure bill and wants every citizen, especially those in rural America, to have access to high-speed Internet.
9:55 PM: Trump calls on Congress “to pass legislation finally banning the late-term abortion of babies.” Trump adds: “Whether we are Republican, Democrat, or Independent, surely we must all agree that every human life is a sacred gift from God!”
He called on Congress to ban late-term abortions after mentioning Ellie Schneider, who “was born a fighter” at “just 21 weeks and 6 days, and weighing less than a pound.”
“Through the skill of her doctors — and the prayers of her parents — little Ellie kept on winning the battle for life.” Trump said. “Today, Ellie is a strong, healthy 2-year-old girl sitting with her amazing mother Robin in the gallery. Ellie and Robin: We are so glad you are here.”
Trump continued:
Ellie reminds us that every child is a miracle of life. Thanks to modern medical wonders, 50 percent of very premature babies delivered at the hospital where Ellie was born now survive. Our goal should be to ensure that every baby has the best chance to thrive and grow just like Ellie. That is why I am asking the Congress to provide an additional $50 million to fund neo-natal research for America’s youngest patients. That is also why I am calling upon the Members of Congress here tonight to pass legislation finally banning the late-term abortion of babies.
9:51 PM: Trump honors Rush Limbaugh, presents him the Presidential Medal of Freedom:
Almost every American family knows the pain when a loved one is diagnosed with a serious illness. Here tonight is a special man, someone beloved by millions of Americans who just received a Stage 4 advanced cancer diagnosis. This is not good news, but what is good news is that he is the greatest fighter and winner that you will ever meet. Rush Limbaugh: Thank you for your decades of tireless devotion to our country. Rush, in recognition of all that you have done for our nation, the millions of people a day that you speak to and inspire, and all of the incredible work that you have done for charity, I am proud to announce tonight that you will be receiving our country’s highest civilian honor, the Presidential Medal of Freedom. I will now ask the First Lady of the United States to please stand and present you with the honor. Rush, and Kathryn, congratulations! Thank you, Kathryn.
Some Democrats yelled "No!" when Trump announced he was awarding Rush Limbaugh with the Presidential Medal of Freedom 
They then gawked as Trump announced that Melania would be presenting him with the medal right now
— Alayna Treene (@alaynatreene) February 5, 2020
9:50 PM: Trump on Coronavirus:
Protecting Americans’ health also means fighting infectious diseases. We are coordinating with the Chinese government and working closely together on the Coronavirus outbreak in China. My Administration will take all necessary steps to safeguard our citizens from this threat.
9:48 PM: As Trump asks Congress to send him bipartisan legislation to lower prescription drug prices, Democrats in white heckle Trump.
POWERFUL: During #SOTU2020, Democrat Reps chanted "HR3!" when Trump claimed he was working to lower drug prices.
It's the bill they passed in December that he's ignored.
It's named after Elijah Cummings, who fought his whole career for lower drug costs.pic.twitter.com/Rqg1RLzIHj
— Bend the Arc: Jewish Action (@jewishaction) February 5, 2020
9:46 PM: Trump also says his administration is taking on the big pharmaceutical companies.
“We have approved a record number of affordable generic drugs, and medicines are being approved by the FDA at a faster clip than ever before,” Trump says. “I was pleased to announce last year that, for the first time in 51 years, the cost of prescription drugs actually went down.”
 
9:45 PM: Trump also rips Democrats for endorsing legislation that would bankrupt the country by providing “free taxpayer-funded healthcare to millions of illegal aliens, forcing taxpayers to subsidize free care for anyone in the world who unlawfully crosses our borders”:
These proposals would raid the Medicare benefits our seniors depend on, while acting as a powerful lure for illegal immigration. This is what is happening in California and other States — their systems are totally out of control, costing taxpayers vast and unaffordable amounts of money. If forcing American taxpayers to provide unlimited free healthcare to illegal aliens sounds fair to you, then stand with the radical left. But if you believe that we should defend American patients and American seniors, then stand with me and pass legislation to prohibit free government healthcare for illegal aliens!
9:42 PM: Trump says nobody should be “blindsided by medical bills” and rips Democrats for proposing a “socialist takeover of our healthcare system.”
That is why I signed an Executive Order requiring price transparency. Many experts believe that transparency, which will go into full effect at the beginning of next year, will be even bigger than healthcare reform. It will save families massive amounts of money for substantially better care.
But as we work to improve Americans’ healthcare, there are those who want to take away your healthcare, take away your doctor, and abolish private insurance entirely. One hundred thirty-two lawmakers in this room have endorsed legislation to impose a socialist takeover of our healthcare system, wiping out the private health insurance plans of 180 million Americans. To those watching at home tonight, I want you to know: We will never let socialism destroy American healthcare!
9:38 PM: Trump makes an “ironclad” promise to protect those with pre-existing conditions + Social Security and Medicare.
Pelosi visably shaking her head as Trump promises to protect patients w/ preexisting conditions, Medicare and Medicaid.
— Paige W. Cunningham (@pw_cunningham) February 5, 2020
9:36 PM:  Trump on putting the American people first: “Members of Congress, we must never forget that the only victories that matter in Washington are victories that deliver for the American people. The people are the heart of our country, their dreams are the soul of our country, and their love is what powers and sustains our country. We must always remember that our job is to put America first!”
“The next step forward in building an inclusive society is making sure that every young American gets a great education and the opportunity to achieve the American Dream,” Trump says. “Yet, for too long, countless American children have been trapped in failing government schools. To rescue these students, 18 States have created school choice in the form of Opportunity Scholarships. The programs are so popular, that tens of thousands of students remain on a waiting list.”
He introduces Janiyah Davis, a fourth grader from Philadelphia, and her mother Stephanie. He tells them that an opportunity scholarship has been made available for Janiyah and she can go to the school of her choice. He calls on Congress to give a million of children the opportunity Janiyah just received. Trump says “no parent should be forced to send their child to a failing government school.
 
9:31 PM: Trump: “Socialism destroys nations, but, always remember, freedom unifies the soul.”
9:30 PM: Trump tells Guaido: “Please take this message back, that all Americans are united with the Venezuelan people.”
 
9:26 PM: Trump says he promised citizens he would “impose tariffs to confront China’s massive theft of America’s jobs. Our strategy has worked. Days ago, we signed a groundbreaking new agreement with China that will defend our workers, protect our intellectual property, bring billions of dollars into our treasury, and open vast new markets for products made and grown here in the U.S.A.” Trump emphasizes that we are now “rebuilding our country.”
9:23 PM: Trump talks about restoring America’s “manufacturing might” and says he also kept his promise to replace the NAFTA trade deal. He says that was one of the main reasons he decided to run for president. He says unlike so many who have come before him, he kept his promise on trade.
9:19 PM: Trump gives a shout out to Sen. Tim Scott (R-SC) for spearheading opportunity zones. He says the booming economy + criminal justice reform have enabled former prisoners to get jobs.
9:17 PM: Trump speaks about the “blue-collar boom” and says real median household income is at the highest level ever recorded.
9:13 PM: After speaking about rejecting the “downsizing of America’s destiny,” Trump talks about his “prosperous” and “inclusive” agenda that is relentlessly “pro-worker, pro-family, pro-growth, and pro-American.” He then discusses the record-low unemployment rates for minorities and millions lifted off of welfare since he has been in office.
9:09 PM: Trump talks about the rejecting of American downsizing and says he is thrilled to report that the economy is booming, military is strong, borders are secure, families are flourishing, values are renewed. He says for all of these reasons, “the state of the union is stronger than ever before.”
9:07 PM: Trump says the “great American comeback” was launched three  years ago and he is here to talk about the results. He says the country is thriving and highly respected again. He says America’s enemies are on the run and America’s future is blazing bright. The years of economic decay are over, he says.
9:05 PM: Trump enters House chamber. Doesn’t shake Pelosi’s hands (maybe didn’t see her reach out). Republicans chant “four more years!”
No Trump handshake for Pelosi pic.twitter.com/7SFqtrTczM
— JM Rieger (@RiegerReport) February 5, 2020
9:00 PM: Melania sits next to Rush:
SOTU getting ready to get under way. Melania Trump, dressed all in black, just entered, sitting next to Rush Limbaugh.
— Brett Davidsen (@whec_bdavidsen) February 5, 2020
Rush Limbaugh arrives at the Capitol for State of the Union pic.twitter.com/NCr88Vc7W1
— Chad Pergram (@ChadPergram) February 5, 2020
8:55 PM: Pelosi, Pence not even looking at each other. House impeachment managers sitting together:
The House's impeachment managers — who are all sitting together  — have had a receiving line of fellow Democrats ever since they got to the floor.
Lots of hand-shaking. I also saw Rep. Dan Kildee give a salute.
— Sarah Ferris (@sarahnferris) February 5, 2020
8:30 PM: Republicans waiting for Trump:
The seat saving by GOPers on or near the center aisle where Trump will walk down for the SOTU is underway – some I've spotted:Rep Gohmert Rep Long Rep Van Drew Rep Perry Rep Johnson Rep Marchant Rep LaMalfa Rep GoodenRep Bilirakis
— Alex Moe (@AlexNBCNews) February 4, 2020
 
8:25 PM: Excerpts of Trump’s speech:
Excerpts of Trump’s speech: pic.twitter.com/R1ks7isrWa
— Kathryn Watson (@kathrynw5) February 5, 2020
8:15 PM: Whitmer releases excerpts of response:
NEW: Office of Gov. Whitmer releases excerpts of her Democratic response to President Trump’s #SOTU tonight. pic.twitter.com/LHVQkqHg15
— Mark Cavitt (@MarkCavitt) February 5, 2020
8:00 PM: State of the Union: Economy booming:
Why should @realDonaldTrump talk about impeachment at the #SOTU when we have the hottest economy in history? https://t.co/0eeWTv7n8c
— Senator Mike Braun (@SenatorBraun) February 4, 2020
The real worry for Ds right now isn’t the IA caucus mess, it’s that: 1) latest Gallup has Trump at 49%, highest ever of his presidency; 2) other polls out this week show Trump on high end of his job approve range; and 1/2
— amy walter (@amyewalter) February 4, 2020
Split Squad: Omar, Tlaib to attend in protest:
I am attending tonight’s address not to confer any legitimacy on his actions, his statements, or his presidency. 
I am attending on behalf of all of those targeted by this President to say, ‘We are greater than hate.’
My presence tonight is resistance.
— Ilhan Omar (@IlhanMN) February 4, 2020
 
"There is no right or wrong way to protest." —@ayannapressley 
I'm joining my sisters in Congress in wearing white–my white #PalestinianThobe–to #SOTU. Being #unapologeticallyMe is my way of protesting this #ImpeachedPresident. pic.twitter.com/S8bHJPyDpz
— Rashida Tlaib (@RashidaTlaib) February 4, 2020
Guaido will attend SOTY:
Exclusive: Venezuelan opposition leader Juan Guaido will attend tonight's State of the Union address as a guest of the White House, suggesting that Trump still sees him as the best chance to replace Maduro https://t.co/JHbYjrypfs @JenniferJJacobs @justinsink
— Patricia Laya (@PattyLaya) February 4, 2020
Dems, Independents Don’t Even Want to Watch SOTU:
Nearly two in five (39%) Americans plan to watch President Donald Trump's State of the Union message tonight. 47% say they will not be watching and don't want to watch the address tonight. https://t.co/OkhlaSavnX #SOTU #SOTU2020 pic.twitter.com/e4SZqVlyvK
— YouGovUS (@YouGovUS) February 4, 2020
 
Resistance Democrats boycotting:
After much deliberation, I have decided that I will not use my presence at a state ceremony to normalize Trump’s lawless conduct & subversion of the Constitution.
None of this is normal, and I will not legitimize it.
Consequently, I will not be attending the State of the Union.
— Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (@AOC) February 4, 2020
Because of an impeached, reckless, ruthless, lawless, shameless, corrupt, & unapologetically bigoted president – who is still engaging in a coverup, the state of the House, the state of the Senate, and the #StateOfTheUnion are divided. 
I will NOT attend #SOTU2020.
— Congressman Al Green (@RepAlGreen) February 4, 2020
I am not attending tonight’s sham #SOTU https://t.co/U9skFWohse
— Ayanna Pressley (@AyannaPressley) February 4, 2020
To think that I would attend the #SOTU to hear the message of an IMPEACHED president is a thought that in no way would be consistent w/ my fight and struggle against this dishonorable president. I will certainly NOT be there!
— Maxine Waters (@RepMaxineWaters) February 4, 2020
I will #BoycottSOTU, but the crowd will be filled w/ people impacted most by Trump's policies & McConnell's shameful inaction. I gave my ticket to Michelle Freedman, a tireless advocate for lower Rx prices. Her experience is why we're fighting to improve the #StateOfHealthCare
— Earl Blumenauer (@repblumenauer) February 4, 2020
I'm not interested in listening to this impeached President lie. Therefore, I will not be attending the #SOTU2020 tonight.
— Bennie G. Thompson (@BennieGThompson) February 4, 2020
 
 