Deranged Freak Bill Gates Laments That People Will Have a Choice in Taking His Vaccine
    
People seem to think that the coronavirus mania has gone away. In fact, it has not. These freakish people are laying in wait to strike you with a new extreme lockdown and a biology-altering vaccine.
RT:
Microsoft billionaire Bill Gates lamented the US is ‘not even close’ to doing enough to fight the pandemic, before warning that the vaccine he wants to inject into every human on the planet does require their consent first.
Speaking to Anderson Cooper at a CNN town hall on Thursday, Gates insisted the US was “experiencing a rebound” in Covid-19 infections even accounting for the increase in testing. That increase, the software tycoon reminded his interviewers, was accomplished by local governments in spite of – not because of – the White House.
Gates seemed miffed that Washington wasn’t following his instructions more closely, complaining that “it’s possible to ramp up testing for a new pathogen very, very fast” if they’d just do as they were told. He blamed the higher infection numbers in the US, which continues to lead the world with upwards of 2.5 million confirmed cases and over 125,000 deaths, on the nation’s failure to adopt the same measures as everyone else.
“Other countries” are “restraining their behavior,” imposing restrictive lockdowns and quarantines, and adopting comprehensive contact tracing, Gates hinted, sounding impatient with the US’ “very large case spread,” which he called “embarrassing.”
“Some people almost feel like [Covid-19 is] a political thing, which is unfortunate.”
“Even to inconvenience themselves with masks requires maybe someone they know to not only test positive but maybe get very sick as well,” he added.
Gates, who has repeatedly expressed a desire to inoculate the world’s population with whatever vaccine emerges from the research laboratories he is funding, admitted the shot might be rolled out before it’s working perfectly. “It’s possible the vaccine will be better at protecting you individually and not stop you from transmitting…it’s not guaranteed that the vaccine will be a perfect transmission blocker.”
Boasting that “the logistics in the US are not an issue at all,” Gates bragged that “we can get this thing out there” before acknowledging that “you’ll have a ‘choice’ whether you take the vaccine or not, so there’s that final hurdle.”
Some 70 to 80 percent of the world’s population will have to take the vaccine before anyone can hope to live a normal life again “with people taking vacations,” travel, and sporting events, Gates explained, implying they had no choice.
Why should anyone on earth trust this man?
He is obsessed with injecting people with this fluid, he is obsessed with destroying our lives with his lockdowns, and he has done absolutely nothing at all to build trust with the people.
His life was spent punishing people brutally with his monopoly software. Everyone has been harmed by this man and his Windows. Everyone has had their work or their video games interrupted by his broken software.
If it was Steve Jobs or Gabe Newell telling us to inject ourselves with a mysterious substance, we could at least say, “well, he does have a record of getting things done right.” Hell, even that other complete freak Jeff Bezos has a record of providing people with successful products. Gates has no such record. His entire life “success” has been based on the fact that the government backs up his crap monopoly software.
Do you remember how he made all those people who bought “Windows phones” suffer? It was unbelievably worthless crap that people were tricked into buying by T-Mobile and others – they were made to suffer. Furthermore, Windows sank Nokia, which had been the biggest phone manufacturer on earth.
Just over the last week, we’ve seen the collapse of the Microsoft game streaming platform Mixer. People went to this platform instead of Twitch or YouTube, and they lost everything due to Microsoft’s classic strategy of total mismanagement. Ninja walked away with a sack of cash, but everyone else walked away with nothing more than broken dreams.
Bill Gates has a total legacy of inflicting suffering on people under the guise of giving them a useful product. Why would anyone think this vaccine is any different?
This isn’t a joke. Think about it. Microsoft as a company was only ever successful because the US government helped them to establish a monopoly, and literally every single place they could have failed they did fail – other than the XBox, but that is one success out of hundreds of abject failures.
Somehow, Gates has this incredible entitlement, where he thinks he has a right to tell everyone on earth what to do. You should watch that video of him whining about how the US government won’t do every single thing he tells them to do. It’s actually amazing that he’s willing to go out in public and whine about how people should have to obey him.
He claims that it’s not political, but there is a lot of room for disagreement about all of this. In fact, saying that there is room for his side is being overly generous. We know as an absolute matter of fact that Sweden never did a lockdown and had many fewer deaths than places that did the lockdown. We also know that more or less everyone in the United States has already been exposed to the virus, so there isn’t really any reason to try to avoid exposure at this point. Beyond that, we know that the virus was never dangerous to healthy people in the first place.
As far as the vaccine, many people do not believe in taking experimental injections. In fact, if it wasn’t so politicized, most scientists would not be supportive of mass injecting people with experimental substances. Clearly, the threat of the injection is bigger than the threat of the disease. The disease has virtually no chance of even making a healthy person seriously ill, let alone killing them.
Basically, getting people to go along with any more of this insanity at this point is going to rely on the sunk costs fallacy. “We’ve already completely destroyed our economy, and facilitated a mass concentration of wealth for the ultra-elite, so we might as well just keep going and inject ourselves with a mystery substance.”
I hope the people have the bravery to stand up against Gates and his mysterious injections.
It will sterilize you, it may well do something to your brain – we don’t have any idea what else it could do. It’s not going to be anything good. He doesn’t want to inject you because he cares about your health, because he’s the one who pushed for this lockdown, which has destroyed people psychologically. Furthermore, everyone knows that if you’re under the age of 75, coronavirus is not a threat to your health.
So he has some other purpose here.
What is that purpose?
It probably relates to his close relationship with Jeffrey Epstein.
Or how about we discuss his father’s relationship with the global elite, including George Soros and David Rockefeller?
Gates is a shill for the Jewish globalist agenda, straight up.
He is pushing some kind of satanic agenda here.