Title: Democrats Ramp Up Their War On America’s Institutions, Promising Riots If Trump Nominates A Justice

Content Text:
It took less than 24 hours for left-wingers to pledge burning down the country if Republicans don’t abdicate their constitutional duty to fill a Supreme Court vacancy following Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg’s Friday death.
“If they even TRY to replace RBG we burn the entire fucking thing down,” wrote Daily Beast contributing editor and CNN documentary maker Reza Aslan.
“We’re shutting this country down if Trump and McConnell try to ram through an appointment before the election,” warned Writers Guild of America President Beau Willimon.
“If Mitch McConnell jams someone through, which he will, there will be riots,” threatened Laura Bassett, a liberal writer whose work has been published in GQ Magazine and the Washington Post.
These are not fringe left-wing bloggers or arbitrary psychopaths trolling the internet on Twitter. These are mainstream writers with considerable platforms working to inspire their thousands of followers to erupt into a second wave of violent unrest after what the nation suffered in the immediate aftermath of George Floyd’s death.
Within two weeks of Floyd’s passing in Minneapolis police custody, militant social justice warriors racked up an estimated $1-2 billion in damage, causing the costliest outbreak of political upheaval in U.S. history, devastating minority businesses while kicking off an entire summer of chaos engulfing the nation’s major cities and eventually spreading to the suburbs.
The silence from elected Democrats denouncing such deadly and destructive discourse remains deafening. Few, however, should be surprised considering it took the party’s presidential nominee more than three months to substantively condemn the violence stemming from the first anarchic shockwave upending law and order.
The Democratic Party convention omitted the mere existence of the riots in August. Nothing to see here, or here, or here, or here, or here, or here, or here, or here, and definitely not here, I guess.
To the contrary, elected Democrats have ramped up their existing war on institutions, giving the American government a stress test by promising the deployment of new political weapons to circumvent Republican governance after employing their full arsenal to delegitimize the Trump presidency for the apparent crime of winning the 2016 election.
This is the same party that has demanded the abolition of the Electoral College, called on electors to overturn the results of an election, supports lowering the voting age to 16, attacked the credibility of U.S. elections, allowed non-citizen voting, hijacked the media, and launched a six-month impeachment over a phone call following the collapse of the grand Russian collusion conspiracy theory that failed to uncover Trump as a Russian agent.
Let’s not forget that Democrats were also the ones who first invoked the nuclear option to scrap the Senate filibuster for executive branch and judicial nominations in 2013, which came back to haunt them when Republicans took power in the White House and the upper chamber three years later. And no one could ever forget, or forgive, the attempted Democratic character assassination of Justice Brett Kavanaugh two years ago.
Two days after Kavanaugh’s Oct. 6 confirmation, former Federalist Senior Editor David Harsanyi, now at National Review, prophesized that “Democrats Have Become A Dangerous Threat To Our Institutions.”
“When modern Democrats talk about preserving ‘norms, traditions,’ or even the ‘Constitution,’ they’re really talking about preserving their preferred policies… According to liberals, every conservative-run institution is illegitimate.” Harsanyi wrote. Almost exactly two years later, Harsanyi’s dark prediction is bearing its poisonous fruit.
Now Democrats have upped the ante, threatening an even greater disruption to federal checks and balances by knocking down some of the last few remaining constitutional barriers to their permanent governance. That includes packing the court with additional justices to weaponize the high bench as a quasi-legislature, ramping up efforts to achieve D.C. and Puerto Rican statehood, and perhaps launching a second crimeless impeachment.
“We have arrows in our quiver that I’m not about to discuss right now,” House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said on the issue of impeachment to ABC’s George Stephanopoulos on “This Week” Sunday.
Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer of New York told Democrats Saturday if Republicans continue to fulfill their constitutionally and electorally mandated authority to replace Ginsburg’s seat, “nothing is off the table.”
Legacy media, as always, have come to support the Democrats’ institutional assault.
“If McConnell pushes through a nominee, President Biden should pack the court,” headlined the Trump-resistance Washington Post.
The New York Times’ Michelle Goldberg went one step further, declaring that should Republicans successfully fill Ginsburg’s seat, “Outraged people should take to the streets en masse” to stop the process.
CNN’s Don Lemon was far more explicit.
“We’re going to have to blow up the entire system,” Lemon said Monday, going on to echo Democrats’ calls to dismantle the constitutionally created Electoral College while showcasing his misunderstanding of how amendments are passed.

Don Lemon doesn't know how Constitutional Amendments are passed. https://t.co/NURxefGKsp
— Stephen L. Miller (@redsteeze) September 22, 2020

But Donald Trump is “corrupting” America’s institutions?
All of this comes as Democrats relish their 21st-century cultural revolution after having capitalized on left-wing academics for decades. Their policies have purposefully cultivated aggressively woke children now permeating the nation’s mainstream institutions and transforming society into a large-scale version of their ideologically conformist college campuses.
Critical education has now turned into indoctrination on critical race theory. Some 4,500 classrooms have adopted the New York Times’ anti-American “1619 Project” into their curricula. College campuses are still trying to out-woke each other, creating segregated dorms and rejecting students not interested in working in black studies.
Even public health and safety have fallen victim, endorsing left-wing demands to defund police and casting doubt on a coronavirus vaccine based solely on the fact that Trump is president.