Title: President-elect Biden seeks a diverse Cabinet. Here's who will join his administration and who might be top contenders

Content Text:
President-elect Joe Biden campaigned to have a government as diverse as America. The nominations to his Cabinet include several historic appointments; each also sheds further light on how the Biden administration will govern as it tackles multiple political, economic and health crises roiling the nation.
He tapped Alejandro Mayorkas, a Cuban American, to become the first Latino head of the Department of Homeland Security; Lloyd Austin as the first African-American to lead the Department of Defense; Janet Yellen as the first woman to head the Treasury; Michael Regan as the first African-American to head the Environmental Protection Agency; Avril Haines as the first female director of national intelligence; Pete Buttigieg as Transportation Secretary would be the first openly gay Cabinet Secretary to be confirmed by the Senate; and Deb Haaland to lead the Interior as the first Native American Interior Secretary and Cabinet member, among others.
Despite the momentous nature of some appointments, Biden has already received criticism for some of his high-profile picks. The incoming administration will be the first in decades, for instance, to not have an Asian-American or Pacific Islander in a Cabinet-level post, a point which AAPI groups and lawmakers have criticized.
Asian-Americans nominated to the administration in non-Cabinet level positions include Vivek Murthy as surgeon general; Neera Tanden as director of the office of management and budget; and Katherine Tai as the U.S. trade representative.
Biden said he sought nominees who would be “accepted by all elements of the Democratic Party." But many progressives have also been disappointed with Biden’s Cabinet, with some crestfallen that he did not appoint liberal icons like Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., to the Labor Department or Elizabeth Warren as treasury secretary.
Yet, with Democrats poised to take control of the U.S. Senate and enjoy unified government in Washington for the first time in a decade, Biden is likely to have an easy time having his nominees confirmed. 
Here is a look at who he has picked and the top contenders for the open jobs: 
Biden will nominate Rep. Deb Haaland to be Secretary of the Interior. If confirmed, she will be the first Native American to not only serve in that position, but in any Cabinet position.
More: Biden to select Deb Haaland as Interior Secretary, the first Native American to hold that position, if confirmed
The Department of the Interior is home to the Bureau of Indian Affairs. Haaland, 59, D-N.M., is an enrolled citizen of the Pueblo of Laguna Native American tribe and serves on the House Natural Resources Committee. She was one of the first two Native American women elected to the United States Congress. 
Prior to being elected to the House of Representatives in 2018, Haaland served as the chair of the Democratic Party of New Mexico. Before that, she ran for lieutenant governor of the state in 2014.
Biden has chosen former South Bend, Indiana, Mayor Pete Buttigieg as his transportation secretary, according to The Associated Press.
More: President-elect Joe Biden wants to put Pete Buttigieg in charge of Transportation Department
Buttigieg, who competed with Biden for the nomination before dropping out and endorsing him, would be the first openly gay Cabinet secretary confirmed by the Senate. 
Buttigieg was the nation’s youngest mayor of a city South Bend’s size or larger when he took office in 2012. He envisioned his hometown as a “beta city,” the perfect size to use his data-driven background with the consulting firm McKinsey to test big ideas. That included the "smart sewers" that saved South Bend an estimated hundreds of millions of dollars and became a template for a product now sold to cities all over the world.
Biden will select former Michigan Gov. Jennifer Granholm to be Secretary of Energy, according to multiple news reports.
More: Joe Biden selects former Michigan Gov. Jennifer Granholm to lead Energy Department, reports say
Granholm, 61, was attorney general of Michigan from 1999 to 2003 and the 47th Governor of Michigan from 2003 to 2011. She was the first woman to serve as Michigan's governor, where she made clean energy development a hallmark of her administration.
Since she left the governor's mansion, Granholm has been involved in several initiatives focused on transforming the nation's energy industry from one focused on fossil fuels to one expanding renewable sources, such as wind and solar.
Biden has tapped Ron Klain as his White House chief of staff. Klain, 59, was a white senior adviser to the Biden campaign. Her served as chief of staff to vice presidents Biden and Al Gore and headed the White House response to the Ebola epidemic in Africa during the Obama administration. He is widely seen as a front-runner for the position.
A close confidant of Biden, Klain had long been rumored for the post even before the election. 
More: Ron Klain named Biden's chief of staff, first White House official picked for administration
In a statement, Biden said Klain's "deep, varied experience and capacity to work with people all across the political spectrum is precisely what I need in a White House chief of staff as we confront this moment of crisis and bring our country together again."
Biden named Antony Blinken, a veteran foreign policy official and longtime confidant, as his choice for secretary of State.
Blinken, who held top-level national security and State Department positions during the Obama administration, has worked side-by-side with Biden on foreign policy issues for nearly two decades.
The move may disappoint some who wanted Biden to nominate Susan Rice, another longtime foreign policy hand and a Black woman, to lead the State Department. Biden has pledged to appoint a diverse Cabinet and tapping Rice would have sent an early signal of his commitment to fulfilling that pledge.
President-elect Joe Biden named Janet Yellen, the first woman to lead the Federal Reserve, to lead the Treasury Department. If she is confirmed, Yellen would become the first woman to head the department. 
Yellen became chair of the Federal Reserve System in February 2014 during the Obama administration, after serving more than three years as vice governor. She previously served as head of the Council of Economic Advisers to President Bill Clinton.
Yellen argued in August that Congress needed to approve additional stimulus to spur growth amid the coronavirus pandemic, as she wrote in an op-ed in the New York Times and told National Public Radio. As a member of the Climate Leadership Council, she supported taxing carbon emissions as the most efficient way to curb greenhouse gas emissions.
Biden will nominate retired Gen. Lloyd Austin to lead the Pentagon, the president-elect announced Dec. 9. 
Austin, who would be the first Black Defense secretary, was the Army’s vice chief of staff and also led the military’s most consequential command, Central Command, which oversees military operations in Iraq, Syria and Afghanistan. Austin prefers to work behind the scenes, building by consensus and leading by example.
The military has struggled to diversify its senior military ranks. Austin is one of a relatively few Black Army officers who have commanded combat units, which is the principal route to the highest commands in the military.
Biden selected Alejandro Mayorkas, a Cuban American lawyer who ran Citizenship and Immigration Services before becoming deputy secretary of the department during the Obama administration, to head the Department of Homeland Security. If confirmed, Mayorkas would be the first Latino to run the department since it was established in 2003. 
Mayorkas, who arrived in the U.S. with his parents as refugees in 1960, would also be the first immigrant to head DHS, which has been at the center of several of President Donald Trump's controversial immigration policies. 
Biden will nominate California Attorney General Xavier Becerra to lead the Health and Human Services department, a critical appointment amid a global pandemic that has killed more than 280,000 people in the U.S. alone.
If confirmed by the Senate, Becerra, 62, will be the first Latino to head the Department of Health and Human Services, a $1-trillion-plus agency with 80,000 employees and a portfolio that includes drugs and vaccines, leading-edge medical research and health insurance programs covering more than 130 million Americans.
Biden will nominate Linda Thomas-Greenfield, who served as the top U.S. diplomat overseeing African affairs in the Obama administration, to be his ambassador to the United Nations.
Biden's nomination of Thomas-Greenfield would elevate a Black woman and career foreign service official to the high-profile position. She would bring a markedly different tone and presence to the international body, which the Trump administration has derided and denigrated.
Tom Perriello, a former Democratic congressman and diplomat, tweeted that Thomas-Greenfield is "a diplomatic powerhouse respected around the world. I’ve witnessed her getting human rights activists freed and kleptocrats held accountable."
Biden nominated Avril Haines, a former deputy CIA director and deputy national security adviser, to become the first woman to lead the U.S. intelligence community as the director of national intelligence. 
Haines worked directly with the president-elect previously, serving as deputy chief counsel to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee from 2007 to 2008 when Biden was the committee's chairman. 
Biden tapped Jake Sullivan to serve as his national security adviser, a role he filled for Biden when he was vice president. Sullivan also previously served as deputy assistant to President Barack Obama and director of the policy planning staff at the State Department under Hillary Clinton.
Sullivan was a lead negotiator during the opening of the talks that led to the Iran nuclear deal, which Trump later pulled out of and which Biden hopes to revive. 
Biden chose all women for his communications team, led by Jen Psaki, a veteran of President Barack Obama's administration, as his press secretary. Psaki, who wore many hats under Obama, including White House communications director, has overseen the confirmation team for Biden's transition.
As press secretary, Psaki will become the public face of the Biden administration, a role that Kayleigh McEnany holds in Trump's administration. 
Biden told CNN he asked Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases since 1984, to become his chief medical adviser and part of his COVID-19 response team. Fauci has been a top official dealing with the pandemic. 
When asked on NBC's "Today" show if he told Biden he would serve as his chief medical adviser, Fauci said, "Oh, absolutely. I said yes right on the spot." 
Former Secretary of State John Kerry was tapped to serve as Biden's special presidential envoy. Kerry played a key role in crafting the Paris Climate Accord and signed the eventual agreement. 
The Paris accord was another international agreement entered during the Obama administration that Trump pulled the U.S. out of and that Biden hopes to rejoin. 
Neera Tanden would be the first woman and first person of Southeast Asian descent to lead the Office of Management and Budget, which not only maps the president's spending blueprint but also serves as a key gatekeeper by reviewing government regulations for their financial impact.
Some progressive Democrats objected to Tanden's nomination as did numerous Republican senators who objected to her history of combative tweets. 
Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C. – who is expected to chair the Budget Committee that will oversee Tanden's confirmation – told reporters Tanden could face an "uphill battle" being approved. 
Biden selected Vivek Murthy, who served as surgeon general during the last three years of the Obama administration, to return to his former role. As surgeon general from 2014-2017, Murthy helped lead the U.S. response to the Zika and Ebola outbreaks and he worked to address the opioid crisis. 
Murthy also helped bring attention to the health consequences of stress and loneliness, an issue often raised as local governments impose restrictions in order to contain the spread of the coronavirus.
Biden has selected Rochelle Walensky, head of the infectious disease division at Massachusetts General Hospital and a Harvard Medical School professor, to replace Robert Redfield as the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Walensky is best known for her work on the national and international response to HIV/AIDS. 
Biden has selected Merrick Garland, a judge on the influential U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, to serve as attorney general. Garland will oversee the Justice Department at a pivotal moment in American history, inheriting issues of criminal justice reform and law enforcement reform, as well as questions of domestic terrorism.
Garland will also have to navigate political questions around the DOJ’s independence as it inherits dilemmas on whether to investigate President Donald Trump and his associates, as well as an ongoing investigation into Biden’s son, Hunter.
Garland was nominated to the Supreme Court by President Barack Obama to replace the late Antonin Scalia, a conservative icon. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell refused to hold a vote for Garland’s nomination, a move that enraged liberals.
Biden will nominate Boston Mayor Marty Walsh to be Labor Secretary in his cabinet. Walsh is both a close ally of organized labor groups and Biden himself. Walsh’s nomination was celebrated by labor unions and activist groups.
Walsh will inherit a labor market in dire straights due to the ongoing coronavirus pandemic. The administration is also expected to address issues related to workplace regulations in a changing economy, expanding collective bargaining and reducing economic inequality.
Biden has selected Miguel Cardona, an education commissioner in Connecticut and longtime teacher, to lead the Department of Education. Cardona will begin his tenure as the nation attempts to reopen schools at all levels amid the coronavirus pandemic.
The department will also likely be called upon to be heavily involved in the fallout of the pandemic, making sure students who have fallen behind or otherwise been adversely impacted by school closures can get back on track.
Cardona will also face calls from progressives to address the country’s nearly $2 trillion student debt crisis. He will also likely be tasked with undoing many of the regulations implemented by his successor, current Education Secretary Betsy DeVos.
Rep. Marcia Fudge, D-Ohio, is Biden's nominee to serve as the secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), he announced. The nomination comes after Biden allies, including South Carolina Rep. Jim Clyburn, lobbied Biden to follow through on his promise to nominate a Cabinet that "looks like America." Fudge would be the fifth African American head of HUD.
HUD will play a critical role in the administration's economic recovery plans, as the country faces an acute rent and mortgage crisis amid the coronavirus pandemic. 
Tom Vilsack, who served as President Barack Obama's secretary of agriculture for eight years, will be nominated to reclaim the role under Biden. The Iowa Democrat is a longtime Biden ally and an experienced hand on rural issues, though his nomination has disgruntled some Black lawmakers who expected a Black nominee in the role.
Vilsack's agenda will naturally focus on rural areas, which have seen their economies especially hard hit by the coronavirus pandemic. Democrats also hope that a focused policy agenda will help the party's prospects in rural areas, where its image has suffered.
Biden chose Denis McDonough, Barack Obama's former chief of staff, as his secretary for the Department of Veterans Affairs, he announced in a statement.
McDonough served as chief of staff during Obama's second term, and was previously the deputy national security adviser, a position he held during the 2011 Navy SEAL raid that killed Osama bin Laden. He is credited with helping Obama on Capitol Hill to bridge divides around the Veterans Choice Act, the Associated Press reported.
Gina Raimondo, the governor of Rhode Island, has been nominated by Biden to serve as commerce secretary. Raimondo, a Rhodes scholar who co-founded a venture capital firm early in her career, has maintained good relations with the business community during her time as governor of The Ocean State.
Raimondo will be tasked with overseeing much of Biden’s trade and domestic economic policies. The Commerce Department is likely to play a large part in executing Biden’s "Buy American" and "Build Back Better" campaigns. The department will also play a role in the crucial trade relationship with China and managing business community sentiments.
President-elect Joe Biden has selected longtime diplomat William J. Burns as his pick to lead the Central Intelligence Agency.
Burns, who has served in the Middle East and Russia, will inherit the country’s premier intelligence agency as cybersecurity and espionage from rival nations like China, Iran and Russia will be of chief concern to the incoming Biden administration.
Burns left the U.S. Foreign Service in 2014 after 33-years. Most recently, he was president of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, a Washington think tank with a focus on foreign policy and international affairs.
Biden will nominate Katherine Tai to be United States trade representative, the nation's top negotiator in trade relations, he announced.  Tai, who is chief trade counsel for the House Ways and Means Committee, was integral to the Trump administration's negotiation of the United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement (USMCA), winning several concessions for congressional Democrats. 
Tai would be the first Asian American person and the first woman of color in the role. Tai previously directed China trade enforcement for the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative and is expected to be integral in crafting U.S. trade policy toward China.
Biden chose Susan Rice – a seasoned diplomat with extensive foreign policy and national security experience – to be director of the White House Domestic Policy Council, his campaign announced Thursday. 
Rice does not have domestic policy experience, and she was seen as a top contender to be Biden's secretary of state. Rice served as President Barack Obama's ambassador to the United Nations and then as his national security adviser.
Biden's campaign said the president-elect chose Rice for the role because she "knows government inside and out" and will "turbocharge the effort to build back better." Rice's appointment is a signal Biden wants his domestic and foreign policy advisers to work hand-in-hand.
Rice's nomination, as a Black woman, also reflects Biden's push for a diverse staff.
Biden and Harris have named a number of other staffers to serve in his incoming administration:
Cedric Richmond, senior adviser and director of the White House Office of Public Engagement
Kate Bedingfield, White House communications director 
Steve Ricchetti, counselor to the president 
Dana Remus, White House counsel
Jen O'Malley Dillon, deputy chief of staff 
Louisa Terrell, director of White House Office of Legislative Affairs
Reema Dodin, deputy director of the Office of Legislative Affairs
Shuwanza Goff,  deputy director of the Office of Legislative Affairs
Cathy Russell, director of the White House Office of Presidential Personnel
Mike Donilon, senior adviser to the president
Pili Tobar, deputy White House communications director 
Karine Jean-Pierre, principal deputy press secretary 
Julie Rodriguez, director of the White House Office of Intergovernmental Affairs 
Carlos Elizondo, White House social secretary
Annie Tomasini, director of Oval Office operations 
Hartina Flournoy, chief of staff to the vice president 
Ashley Etienne, communications director to the vice president 
Symone Sanders, senior adviser and chief spokesperson for the vice president
Rohini Kosoglu, domestic policy adviser to the vice president 
Julissa Reynoso Pantaleon, chief of staff to the first lady 
Elizabeth Alexander, communications director for the first lady 
Mala Adiga, policy director for the first lady 
Anthony Bernal, senior adviser to the first lady  
Health team: 
Marcella Nunez-Smith, COVID-19 equity task force chairwoman
Jeff Zients, COVID-19 response coordinator and counselor to the president
Natalie Quillian, deputy COVID-19 response coordinator 
Economics team: 
Cecilia Rouse, chair of the Council of Economic Advisers 
Wally Adeyemo, deputy secretary of the treasury 
Brian Deese, director of the National Economic Council 
Justice team:
Lisa Monaco, deputy attorney general
Kristen Clarke, assistant attorney general for Civil Rights Division
Vanita Gupta, associate attorney general
Contributing: Maureen Groppe, Kevin Johnson, Deirdre Shesgreen, Savannah Behrmann, Rebecca Morin and Tom Vanden Brook, Jeanine Santucci, Matthew Brown