Title: Dem Senators Say Mismanaged Student Loan Program Screwed Thousands

Spotlight: Lawmakers demanded that the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau investigate a loan forgiveness program for teachers and other public service workers.

Content Text:
LOADINGERROR LOADING
A group of Democratic senators demanded that the top consumer financial watchdog agency immediately investigate an embattled student loan servicer and its alleged mismanagement of a federal program designed to forgive the loans of teachers, nurses, firefighters and other public service workers.
The 23 senators said in a Monday letter addressed to Kathleen Kraninger, the director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, that the Pennsylvania Higher Education Assistance Agency had committed many “missteps” and “errors” in its servicing of the Public Service Loan Forgiveness program ― resulting in “harm to tens of thousands of public service workers and their families.”
Advertisement


The letter, signed by 2020 presidential contenders Elizabeth Warren, Bernie Sanders, Cory Booker, Kamala Harris and Amy Klobuchar, was obtained by NPR.
It's time for @CFPBDirector to do her job and stand up for borrowers. This means holding @PHEAAaid accountable for #PSLF breakdowns that are ruining the lives of countless nurses, teachers, police and other public servants. https://t.co/zP2riF2f9N— Student Borrower Protection Center (@theSBPC) October 29, 2019
PHEAA ― a quasi-governmental agency that does business as FedLoan ― is the sole servicer of the PSLF program, which was established in 2007 and was meant to forgive the remainder of public service workers’ federal student loan debt after they make 10 years of qualifying payments.
PHEAA, however, has been accused of grossly mismanaging the program, leading to the denial of loan forgiveness for the vast majority of applicants — even eligible ones.
Advertisement


The New York Times, citing data from the Education Department, said in July that the program was a “spectacular failure.” 
“In the 18 months after borrowers with a decade of service in government or nonprofit jobs first became eligible [for the program] in 2017, 73,554 people applied to have their student loans wiped out. And 73,036 were turned down — a rejection rate of 99.3 percent,” the Times reported. 
As the senators’ letter pointed out this week, government watchdogs have repeatedly called out the PHEAA’s mismanagement of the program over the years. Yet, the senators wrote, “the CFPB has refused to exercise its authority to conduct supervisory examinations of PHEAA’s servicing practices and its management of the PSLF program.”
“We have repeatedly pressed the CFPB to conduct this critical oversight, but you have provided nothing but excuses for the CFPB’s inaction,” the lawmakers said.
New York and Massachusetts have separately sued PHEAA for its failure to adequately service the PSLF program. 
Advertisement


New York Attorney General Letitia James said in her complaint, filed in Manhattan federal court earlier this month, that “PHEAA’s abuses have not only denied these dedicated public servants the benefits they have earned, but have undermined the goals of the loan forgiveness program.”
A spokesman for PHEAA told the Times that the allegations in the New York suit were “without merit.” 
Support HuffPostOur 2024 Coverage Needs YouYour Loyalty Means The World To UsAt HuffPost, we believe that everyone needs high-quality journalism, but we understand that not everyone can afford to pay for expensive news subscriptions. That is why we are committed to providing deeply reported, carefully fact-checked news that is freely accessible to everyone.Whether you come to HuffPost for updates on the 2024 presidential race, hard-hitting investigations into critical issues facing our country today, or trending stories that make you laugh, we appreciate you. The truth is, news costs money to produce, and we are proud that we have never put our stories behind an expensive paywall.Would you join us to help keep our stories free for all? Your contribution of as little as $2 will go a long way.As Americans head to the polls in 2024, the very future of our country is at stake. At HuffPost, we believe that a free press is critical to creating well-informed voters. That's why our journalism is free for everyone, even though other newsrooms retreat behind expensive paywalls.Our journalists will continue to cover the twists and turns during this historic presidential election. With your help, we'll bring you hard-hitting investigations, well-researched analysis and timely takes you can't find elsewhere. Reporting in this current political climate is a responsibility we do not take lightly, and we thank you for your support.Contribute as little as $2 to keep our news free for all.Dear HuffPost ReaderThank you for your past contribution to HuffPost. We are sincerely grateful for readers like you who help us ensure that we can keep our journalism free for everyone.The stakes are high this year, and our 2024 coverage could use continued support. Would you consider becoming a regular HuffPost contributor?Dear HuffPost ReaderThank you for your past contribution to HuffPost. We are sincerely grateful for readers like you who help us ensure that we can keep our journalism free for everyone.The stakes are high this year, and our 2024 coverage could use continued support. If circumstances have changed since you last contributed, we hope you’ll consider contributing to HuffPost once more.Support HuffPostAlready contributed? Log in to hide these messages.