Title: Rep. Debra Haaland becomes first Native American woman to preside over House

Content Text:
WASHINGTON – New Mexico Rep. Debra Haaland got a standing ovation Friday as she presided over the U.S. House during a testy debate over a massive Democratic voting rights and campaign finance bill.
It wasn’t because both sides agreed with the measure.
Democrats and Republicans stood and applauded after Illinois Rep. Rodney Davis, the top Republican on the House Administration Committee, saluted Haaland for making history as the first Native American woman to preside over the chamber. Davis, who was leading debate on the GOP side, paused to recognize the historic moment, his office said.
Haaland said thank you, then picked up the gavel.
Haaland, a Democrat from New Mexico, is one of two Native American women elected to Congress last fall. The other was Rep. Sharice Davids, a Democrat from Kansas.
Haaland was also among the record number of women elected to Congress and part of a freshman class that is the most diverse in the chamber’s history.
Presiding over a voting rights bill was fitting for Haaland.
The House passed H.R.1, a sweeping anti-corruption and government ethics and voting rights package, 234-193, along party lines.
A longtime organizer in New Mexico, Haaland said voting rights is one of her signature issues. She introduced a bill last month that would require states to provide same-day voter registration for federal elections. 
She's also a cosponsor of a measure proposed by Rep. Terri Sewell, D-Ala., that would restore a key provision of the 1965 Voting Rights Act.
“All the oppression and shenanigans that went on this past election I think will help our case,” Haaland told USA TODAY in a recent interview.
Haaland, who doesn’t know what it’s like to be in the minority in Congress, dismissed the thought that the measure doesn’t stand a chance in the Republican-controlled Senate.
“Just because we’re fearful that something won’t pass in the Senate doesn’t mean we can sit back and not do anything," she said, noting that House Speaker Nancy Pelosi was able to beat the odds and get the 2010 Affordable Care Act passed. “I think things can get done. It’s up to us to bring Republicans into the fold, help them to understand how important these issues are."
Republicans, including Davis, slammed the bill, calling it a federal government power grab.
It's been a busy first three months for Haaland.
Last month, she presided over her first hearing of the subcommittee on National Parks, Forests, and Public Lands.
She also joined Democratic Leader Steny Hoyer on a congressional trip to the southern border to talk to immigrant rights advocates.
She met with the other two co-chairs of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee’s Women Lead, a program that aims to recruit more women to run for Congress.
She also filed her first bill, the Antiquities Act, which aims to protect federal lands and monuments. The framed measure sits on a shelf in her office.
“A lot of these lands are lands that are sacred sites,’’ she said. “That figures into my whole protection of or public lands and national monuments.’” 
Contributing: Ledyard King