Title: Tensions flare at House session as Dems take aim at Trump travel ban

Content Text:
Fox News Flash top headlines are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com.
In a sometimes-testy committee markup, Democrats passed the “No Ban Act” to repeal Trump’s bans that apply to foreign nationals from seven countries – with an additional six countries on deck later this month.
While the measure is unlikely to advance in the GOP-controlled Senate, Democrats panned the restrictions as a cruel Muslim ban that has torn thousands of families apart needlessly, while Republicans blasted the repeal as Democrats’ latest attempt to undercut Trump.
“This has nothing to do with religion. This has to do with securing our country,” said Rep. Debbie Lesko, R-Ariz., taking on Democrats for calling it a Muslim ban. “...If it really was, as you call it, a Muslim ban, why wouldn’t Indonesia be on this ban? I mean they have a lot of Muslims. This is just inaccurate. You are just spreading this falsity.”
“How do we know [it's a Muslim ban]? We know because the president, who is occasionally honest, told us so!” Nadler said.
Nadler’s comment sparked fury among the GOP. The top Republican on the committee, Rep. Doug Collins, then called Nadler “occasionally honest” several times and lamented that impeachment dragged the committee down a road lacking rules and civility.
Rep. Ken Buck, R-Colo., eventually asked for Nadler’s dig at Trump to be taken down.
Nadler said the “occasionally honest” line didn’t violate rules on decorum, was an exercise of his free speech and was “accurate.” Nonetheless, debate on the No Ban Act took a pause when the full Judiciary Committee took a vote on whether Nadler’s comments should be retracted. The effort failed and Nadler's comments stood.
After Wednesday's party-line passage out of the Judiciary Committee, the No Ban Act heads to a full vote in the House in the coming weeks. A similar bill has been introduced in the Senate, but passage there seems less likely with Republicans in control of the upper chamber.
Republicans argued Trump is trying to keep Americans safe and rejected the label of a Muslim ban.
"There are 50 predominantly Muslim countries around the world and 45 are not subject to restrictions," Buck said. "Afghanistan is not. Turkey is not. Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Indonesia and Egypt are not.
"What is this policy really about? Making sure we can sufficiently verify every individual who wants to enter the U.S. is not a criminal or terrorist," Buck added.
The ban has been subjected to various challenges and has been revised several times. It’s currently subject to ongoing litigation.
“People cannot live in Yemen any longer due to this crisis. And when they're forced to leave, they will … naturally turn to where their family lives overseas, which is in my district,” Rose said of his Brooklyn/Staten Island seat.  “And because … of the Muslim ban, they are unable to reunite and they have nowhere else to go.”
“There’s no national security justification for this,” Rose said.
He added: “This is a failed policy. And as quickly as possible, we have to do everything in our power to change it. So I'm proud that that's what's happening.”