Title: French President Macron refuses to 'erase' history by removing colonial-era statues

Content Text:
The death of George Floyd in police custody raises new conversations about racism in America; Bryan Llenas reports.
Macron publicly acknowledged that someone’s “address, name, color of skin” could reduce their chances to succeed in French society. He called for assurances that everyone could “find their place” in society, regardless of origin.
Regarding calls to remove statues representing France’s slave trade or colonial wrongs, though, Macron said, “the republic will not erase any trace, or any name, from its history... it will not take down any statue.”
Hundreds of demonstrators gathering on the Champs de Mars as the Eiffel Tower is seen in the background during a demonstration in Paris earlier this month. (AP Photo/Francois Mori, File) 
“We should look at all of our history together” including relations with Africa, with a goal of “truth” instead of “denying who we are,” Macron said.
A demonstration against police brutality and racism in Paris this past Saturday. (AP Photo/Thibault Camus) 
French police unionists demonstrating with a banner reading, "No police, no peace," on the Champs-Elysee avenue near the Arc de Triomphe this past Friday in Paris. (AP Photo/Michel Euler) 
The French culture minister recently denounced the decision to cancel a Paris showing of the 1939 film “Gone With the Wind” as contrary to freedom of expression. He also criticized attempts to remove a piece of African art from a Paris museum dedicated to works from former colonies.
Sibeth Ndiaye, a close ally of Macron and a prominent black figure in current French politics, published an essay in Le Monde that called for France to rethink its colorblind policy, which was said to ignore race in an attempt to encourage equality. 
“We must not hesitate to name things, to say that a skin color is not neutral,” she wrote. She called on the French to confront its history and find a “shared narrative” with former colonies.
The Associated Press contributed to this report. 