Title: Georgia Democrat Seeks Vasectomy Ban In Response To Restrictive Abortion Bill

Spotlight: State Rep. Dar’shun Kendrick (D) is calling the proposed legislation a “testicular bill of rights.”

Content Text:
LOADINGERROR LOADING
A Democratic lawmaker in Georgia has proposed banning vasectomies and requiring men to get permission from their sex partners before obtaining Viagra prescriptions in response to a restrictive new abortion bill approved by the state’s House of Representatives last week.
State Rep. Dar’shun Kendrick (D) is calling the proposed legislation a “testicular bill of rights.”
“You want some regulation of bodies and choice? Done!” Kendrick, who represents metro Atlanta’s 93rd District, tweeted Monday morning.
Advertisement


Ggggooooodddd morning! Introducing my "testicular bill of rights" legislative package. You want some regulation of bodies and choice? Done! pic.twitter.com/5E8HBRSc9l— Dar'shun Kendrick (@DarshunKendrick) March 11, 2019
Her proposal brings into sharp focus conservatives’ crusade to legislate control of women’s bodies through restrictive abortion bills and other measures that undermine reproductive rights.
In addition to the vasectomy and Viagra measures, the legislative package would make it an “aggravated assault” for a man to have sex without a condom. It would also dictate paternity testing before eight weeks of pregnancy and require expectant fathers to immediately begin paying child support. Last on Kendrick’s list is a proposed 24-hour waiting period for any man who wishes to purchase pornography or sex toys in Georgia.
The aim of the proposed legislation is to “bring awareness to the fact that if you’re going to legislate our bodies, then we have every right to propose legislation to regulate yours,” Kendrick told Rolling Stone.
Advertisement


The Georgia House last week approved a bill that which would criminalize most abortions after a doctor can detect a heartbeat in the womb. (That typically occurs around six weeks of gestation, before many women even realize they are pregnant.) 
The bill moves now to the state Senate, which, like the House, has a Republican majority. If it passes the Senate, it will go to Gov. Brian Kemp (R), who has said he supports the bill.
After the bill was moved forward by a House committee last week, Kendrick joined other Georgia Democrats in presenting their Republican colleagues with wire hangers and bottles of bleach on the chamber floor. The items were meant to act as symbols of the self-induced abortions that many women dangerously attempt when the aid of a doctor isn’t available or allowed.
Legislation that passed in the Georgia legislature in 2012 prohibits abortions after 20 weeks. Georgia law previously permitted abortions up to 24 weeks.
At the time of that legislation, Democratic state Rep. Yasmin Neal made a proposal similar to Kendrick’s as a way of making a point about the attack on women’s reproductive rights.
Advertisement


In a statement announcing a bill to bar men from seeking vasectomies, Neal said, “It is patently unfair that men can avoid unwanted fatherhood by presuming that their judgment over such matters is more valid than the judgment of the General Assembly, while women’s ability to decide is constantly up for debate throughout the United States.”
Support HuffPostOur 2024 Coverage Needs YouYour Loyalty Means The World To UsAt HuffPost, we believe that everyone needs high-quality journalism, but we understand that not everyone can afford to pay for expensive news subscriptions. That is why we are committed to providing deeply reported, carefully fact-checked news that is freely accessible to everyone.Whether you come to HuffPost for updates on the 2024 presidential race, hard-hitting investigations into critical issues facing our country today, or trending stories that make you laugh, we appreciate you. The truth is, news costs money to produce, and we are proud that we have never put our stories behind an expensive paywall.Would you join us to help keep our stories free for all? Your contribution of as little as $2 will go a long way.As Americans head to the polls in 2024, the very future of our country is at stake. At HuffPost, we believe that a free press is critical to creating well-informed voters. That's why our journalism is free for everyone, even though other newsrooms retreat behind expensive paywalls.Our journalists will continue to cover the twists and turns during this historic presidential election. With your help, we'll bring you hard-hitting investigations, well-researched analysis and timely takes you can't find elsewhere. Reporting in this current political climate is a responsibility we do not take lightly, and we thank you for your support.Contribute as little as $2 to keep our news free for all.Dear HuffPost ReaderThank you for your past contribution to HuffPost. We are sincerely grateful for readers like you who help us ensure that we can keep our journalism free for everyone.The stakes are high this year, and our 2024 coverage could use continued support. Would you consider becoming a regular HuffPost contributor?Dear HuffPost ReaderThank you for your past contribution to HuffPost. We are sincerely grateful for readers like you who help us ensure that we can keep our journalism free for everyone.The stakes are high this year, and our 2024 coverage could use continued support. If circumstances have changed since you last contributed, we hope you’ll consider contributing to HuffPost once more.Support HuffPostAlready contributed? Log in to hide these messages.