Title: How is coronavirus affecting immigration into the US?

Content Text:
Mark Morgan, acting commissioner of Customs and Border Protection, joins Tucker Carlson on 'Tucker Carlson Tonight.'
In March, President Trump signed an executive order closing the southern border to stop the spread of the virus from undocumented immigrants who are possibly infected.
“The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is exercising its authority under Title 42 of the U.S. Code to give Customs and Border Protection the tools it needs to prevent the virus coming through the northern and southern borders,” he said during his announcement of the move.
Below are some of the ways the rapidly spreading coronavirus has tweaked the immigration system, impacting millions who are effectively left in limbo until things return to normal.
Office closures
The agency, which acts as the core agency dealing with most forms of legal immigration and asylum cases in the U.S., said it would continue to provide emergency services and “mission-essential services” that don’t require face-to-face contact.
Field offices will send notices to those with appointments or naturalization ceremonies, while asylum applications will receive a new interview notice with a new appointment time.
Hearings
The May 1 date also applies to hearings for those placed in the Migrant Protection Protocols (MPP) program, known as Remain in Mexico, which keeps migrants in Mexico while their asylum hearings play out.
Cross-border travel
The United States has suspended nonessential travel to Canada and Mexico.
Guatemala suspends agreement
Guatemala suspended a landmark asylum agreement with the U.S. last month amid concerns over the pandemic. The country said it would halt incoming flights carrying deportees and asylum-seekers sent by the U.S.
"Starting today all flights of returnees under the [agreement with Washington] are suspended for the duration of the state of calamity," Foreign Minister Pedro Brolo said.
Illegal Immigration
In this Thursday, March 14, 2019, file photo, a Border Patrol agent talks with a group suspected of having entered the U.S. illegally near McAllen, Texas. The Trump administration has quietly shut down the nation's asylum system for the first time in decades amid coronavirus concerns, largely because holding people in custody is considered too dangerous. (AP Photo/Eric Gay, File) 
Refugees
"We will work with our implementing partners to plan for a resumption of refugee arrivals on or after April 7," an agency spokesperson told Fox News last month.
Fox News' Nick Givas contributed to this report. 