Title: Trump Claims 'Tremendous Strides' Made Since Parkland Massacre

Spotlight: While gun control legislation has largely stalled on the federal level, around 1,200 kids were shot to death in the last year.

Content Text:
LOADINGERROR LOADING
President Donald Trump noted the anniversary of the Parkland, Florida, school shooting Thursday with a statement that claimed his administration has made “tremendous strides” toward better school safety but barely mentioned gun control.
Trump’s statement recalled an emotional “listening session” held at the White House in the days after the Feb. 14, 2018, shooting, in which a gunman killed 17 people at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School.
Advertisement


“We learned a lot that afternoon,” the statement said. The president heard from the school shooting survivors and parents who were invited to share their thoughts about gun control as the president held a note card reminding himself to listen. 
“We took immediate action, committing ourselves to a sacred vow to do everything in our power to ensure that evil does not stalk our children on the playgrounds or in the hallways of our Nation’s schools,” Trump continued in Thursday’s statement. 
In the immediate aftermath of Parkland, Trump had initially expressed support for the type of strict gun legislation the National Rifle Association has long opposed, but abandoned those promises just a couple weeks later. He has since expressed support for more guns in schools ― including an effort to arm some teachers ― earning criticism from a vocal sector of Parkland students who were moved to fight against the powerful gun lobby. 
The critics, including David Hogg, Cameron Kasky and Emma Gonzalez, said they were not invited to the White House listening session. They went on to lead a nationwide gun control protest, March for Our Lives, in late March of last year.
Advertisement


In Thursday’s statement, the president touted his support for the STOP School Violence Act, a bipartisan measure to finance school safety training and security equipment, along with a measure to strengthen the national criminal background check system. Neither is a gun control measure. The Trump administration did tighten gun control in late 2018 by enacting a ban on bump stocks, which allow semiautomatic weapons to mimic machine guns, but that effort was not a response to Parkland.
A December report issued by the Federal Commission on School Safety, convened by the Trump administration, downplayed the role of guns in school violence, instead focusing on rolling back certain Obama-era policies. The report also recommended arming some teachers and improving mental health care in schools.
Gun legislation has largely stalled at the federal level due to Republican opposition. Yet some progress has been made at the state level. More than half of states passed at least one gun control measure in 2018, according to the Giffords advocacy group. 
Around 1,200 kids have been shot to death since the Parkland incident, according to a joint reporting project from The Trace and the Miami Herald. 
Support HuffPostOur 2024 Coverage Needs YouYour Loyalty Means The World To UsAt HuffPost, we believe that everyone needs high-quality journalism, but we understand that not everyone can afford to pay for expensive news subscriptions. That is why we are committed to providing deeply reported, carefully fact-checked news that is freely accessible to everyone.Whether you come to HuffPost for updates on the 2024 presidential race, hard-hitting investigations into critical issues facing our country today, or trending stories that make you laugh, we appreciate you. The truth is, news costs money to produce, and we are proud that we have never put our stories behind an expensive paywall.Would you join us to help keep our stories free for all? Your contribution of as little as $2 will go a long way.As Americans head to the polls in 2024, the very future of our country is at stake. At HuffPost, we believe that a free press is critical to creating well-informed voters. That's why our journalism is free for everyone, even though other newsrooms retreat behind expensive paywalls.Our journalists will continue to cover the twists and turns during this historic presidential election. With your help, we'll bring you hard-hitting investigations, well-researched analysis and timely takes you can't find elsewhere. Reporting in this current political climate is a responsibility we do not take lightly, and we thank you for your support.Contribute as little as $2 to keep our news free for all.Dear HuffPost ReaderThank you for your past contribution to HuffPost. We are sincerely grateful for readers like you who help us ensure that we can keep our journalism free for everyone.The stakes are high this year, and our 2024 coverage could use continued support. Would you consider becoming a regular HuffPost contributor?Dear HuffPost ReaderThank you for your past contribution to HuffPost. We are sincerely grateful for readers like you who help us ensure that we can keep our journalism free for everyone.The stakes are high this year, and our 2024 coverage could use continued support. If circumstances have changed since you last contributed, we hope you’ll consider contributing to HuffPost once more.Support HuffPostAlready contributed? Log in to hide these messages.
Advertisement

