Title: Big companies that are boycotting Facebook advertise on Russia’s equivalent of social network, report says

Spotlight: VK describes itself as largest social network in Russia

Content Text:
Fox News Flash top headlines are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com.
But advertising has continued on VK.com, according to the Washington Free Beacon -- though it’s not clear if these companies are, as of Wednesday, actively running ads on VK. 
In this photo illustration the VKontakte (VK) logo is seen displayed on a smartphone. (Photo Illustration by Rafael Henrique/SOPA Images/LightRocket via Getty Images)
That report said “white supremacists” had been migrating to VK for several years after Facebook took measures at that time to crack down on hate speech.
The Free Beacon added that though VK has taken steps to cull hate groups from its site, “organizations like the National Socialist Movement and the Ku Klux Klan still maintain an active presence on the website.”
“We completely disagree with the statement claiming that we are ‘an international hub for white supremacists.’ VK has never tolerated calls to violence, nor nationalist or extremist propaganda, regardless of their place of origin. If such content is found, the VK Team reacts quickly to remove it and block offenders,” VK told Fox News in a statement.
“Thanks to user reports and proactive monitoring, we delete hundreds of thousands of pieces of content and block thousands of profiles every month for promoting violence and cruelty or distributing shocking content on our platform, regardless of where the offender is from,” VK said.
Fox News sought comments from companies cited in this story; only a few responded. 
Starbucks told Fox News it is not doing any paid advertising on VK.com.
Adidas told Fox News in a statement: “The swift and resolute action taken with Facebook and Instagram was only a first step. We are already underway with developing criteria that we will hold every one of our partners accountable to. We all have a responsibility for creating and maintaining safe environments, and we will soon address this across any company we may work with."
Fox News’ Christopher Carbone contributed to this article.