Title: New York Yankees make sweeping changes to medical staff

Content Text:
Fox News Flash top headlines for Jan. 4 are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com
Previous director of strength and conditioning Matt Krause was dismissed, as The Post first reported on Dec. 20, and longtime head athletic trainer Steve Donohue, who began working for the Yankees organization in 1979 and joined the big league club in 1986 under legendary trainer Gene Monahan, will assume an emeritus role. The Yankees plan to announce their reorganization, with precise titles, shortly.
Last season, even as the Yankees won 103 regular-season games and another five in October, they endured massive injury damages.
Oct 17, 2019; Bronx, NY, USA; New York Yankees pitcher CC Sabathia (52) reacts as he examined by trainer Steve Donohue after suffering an apparent injury against the Houston Astros as third baseman Gio Urshela (29) looks on during the eighth inning of game four of the 2019 ALCS playoff baseball series at Yankee Stadium. (USA Today Sports)
A total of 30 players logged 39 stays on the injured list, and their total of 2,433 days lost to the IL set a known record for the sport, according to Major League Baseball.
General manager Brian Cashman made his displeasure public on June 30, during the team’s visit to London, when he said, “I’ve gone through the process and I’ll leave it at that. We always evaluate our processes. If there [are] gaps or problems or mistakes made by us, then they are dealt with.”
They have been dealt with. Cressey co-founded Cressey Sports Performance, which has facilities in Massachusetts and Florida, and he has worked with star pitchers such as Max Scherzer, Corey Kluber and the Mets’ Noah Syndergaard. He hosts a podcast and writes a blog, and such is his stature that, as The Athletic reported, the Yankees will allow him to keep working with other teams’ players.
Trainer Michael Schuk, who spent the six prior seasons as Donohue’s deputy, will take on the head role.